---
layout: post
title:  "The Uppercut - A Game for the Ages"
---
*You can subscribe to the Uppercut by following @simoonssnaps on Instagram, or emailing @theuppercutblog@gmail.com to receive new post notifications.*

Welcome back to another edition of the Uppercut! It was a huge weekend in the Rugby World Cup as the world's number 1 team took on the reigning champions, while in Spain Europe clashed with the USA in golf's Solheim Cup. Plus, there was a surprise appearance at an NFL game that may just introduce a whole new group of viewers to the sport. All of that is dealt with below, and as always, please don't hesitate to get in touch!

## And Breathe
Estimates vary on the number of Irish enjoying the sights and sounds of Paris last weekend, but it’s fair to say the Stade de France has never looked so green. Billed as the game of the tournament so far, Ireland versus South Africa did not disappoint as the two top-ranked sides in the world went at it hammer-and-tongs, refusing to give so much as an inch. While the stakes for a pool game are not the same as knockout levels(both sides would still have been favourites to qualify regardless of the result), the potential momentum and confidence boost from winning a game of this magnitude could propel a team through the tournament. This was perhaps more important from an Irish standpoint, the South Africans having the experience of a World Cup win(which included a loss in the pool stage to New Zealand) to drawn upon if needs be. Ireland, conversely, have the weight of history against them having never won a quarter-final, and a loss here could have put a serious, if not fatal, dent in the confidence that this squad could break that curse.

The tone was set from the opening kickoff, as Ronan Kelleher emptied Damian Willemse with the first tackle of the game. Parity with the ‘Boks from a physical standpoint was a prerequisite to achieving a result, and Ireland refused to be bullied in the early exchanges. However, several early attempts to exert pressure on the ‘Boks were scuppered by a malfunctioning lineout, Irish fans watching in horror as a weeks-long concern reared its ugly head at the most inopportune time. After a Faf de Klerk kick bounced horribly for James Lowe, Ireland were thankful for a Garry Ringrose try-saving tackle on opposite-number Jesse Kriel, but Mannie Libbok put the Africans 3-0 up with what would turn out to be his only successful kick of the day. Ireland displayed a mental fortitude we have seen from this group on a number of occasions, but perhaps missing from some of their predecessors, to soak up more South African pressure and begin to turn the tide. Keenan went close after the lineout finally began to fire, before a 60-metre gallop by Bundee Aki, Ireland’s player of the tournament so far, set Ireland up in the ‘Boks’ 22. They went through the phases brilliantly before simple hands from James Lowe, flat to the line, sent Mack Hansen over to deafening noise both in the stadium and in pubs across Ireland. Sexton converted to give Ireland a deserved 7-3 lead, having had the better off the attacking opportunities.

The inevitable South African onslaught arrived with the second-half, as Ireland were forced to play long periods without the ball, starving their potent attack of possession. A long-range penalty miss from Faf de Klerk turned from blessing to nightmare after it ricocheted off the post, allowing the ‘Boks to recover the ball and set up camp in the Irish 22. South Africa deployed 4 of their 7 substitute forwards from the bench to heap pressure on the Irish scrum, and eventually Libbok found winger Cheslin Kolbe with a looping pass for an easy score. Dan Sheehan and Iain Henderson entered the fray for Ireland as they looked to retake the lead, and were integral to winning a huge scrum penalty in front of the South African posts on the hour mark. Sexton was flawless again, and Ireland led 10-8 with 20 minutes to play as 'The Fields of Athenry' rang out from every conrer of the stadium. Yet again in this pulsating clash, momentum shifted, and South Africa probed for a way through the Irish defence. Their pressure forced a rake of penalties, but their woeful goal-kicking meant 2 more penalty attempts went begging, and allied with a crooked throw 5 metres from Ireland’s line, Ireland smelled blood. Working their way into South African territory, the Irish were grateful for a mental blunder by the opposition, full-back Willemse allowing the ball to trickle out after a missed drop-goal by Jack Crowley, not realising it had been touched by a South African hand and therefore giving Ireland a 5-metre scrum. Another penalty against the ‘Boks’ ‘Nuke Squad’ ensued, which Crowley knocked over for a 13-8 lead. There was time for one last throw of the dice for South Africa, as they went to their famous maul off a lineout metres from Ireland’s line. They shunted towards the line before their momentum was halted, and referee Ben O’Keefe adjudged Ireland's maul defence to have been successful and blew his whistle for the end of the game.

The incredible scenes at the final whistle, as the predominantly Irish crowd belted out Zombie by the Cranberries, were nothing short of goosebump-inducing, and show why this Ireland team really could become history-makers. Avoiding France is so important because if they can manage that, at every game from here on in, the crowd will be dominated by a fantastic Irish travelling support who truly believe in this team. The team themselves look like they believe, and the confidence they will take from this victory is immeasurable. The rugby world has often wondered, despite Ireland’s #1 status, if this team can match the physical challenges posed by South Africa and France. They have now beaten both sides this year, and have fronted up massively on both occasions. They genuinely look like they enjoy proving their naysayers wrong, and will celebrate this low-scoring affair with the same, if not more, gusto as any of their blowout wins. Their breakdown accuracy was breathtaking, and they outclassed the Boks in this key department, a feather in the cap of the coaching staff.

Much of the match-related discourse following the game has been about the Springboks’ inability to kick their goals, and their surprising decisions to continue doing so despite their potent lineout and maul abilities, leading many to conclude that they would likely emerge victorious from any potential rematch. While a lot of this is true and South Africa did miss 11 points off the tee, there’s no saying what an Irish reaction to falling behind again would have been. Also, to think Ireland have ‘maxed out’ in this game is absurd, as this was one of their more nervy performances in recent memory, their lineout certainly costing them points in the early going. They’ll learn a lot from having faced the Springboks defence in a live setting, and getting their first true test of the tournament out of the way(injury-free too) will no doubt stand to them in the coming weeks.

As mentioned, this game was not do-or-die for either team, and after Saturday’s match there would not be many fans begrudging a rematch in the final. That still feels like a long way off, particularly for Ireland given their history, and neither team has even qualified for the knockout stages yet. South Africa will face Tonga in their final group game this weekend, and the expected 5 points they will take from that encounter(Tonga were very disappointing against Scotland) will all but guarantee their spot in the quarter-finals. Whether that is in 1st or 2nd place in the group will be decided on the final weekend, when Ireland return to the Stade de France for another huge clash with 6 Nations rivals Scotland. Scotland are the side who are likely to suffer the most from the lopsided pool draw, being the 5th-ranked side in the world coming into the tournament but facing an uphill battle to even emerge from the group. However, a win over Ireland by more than 7 points would almost certainly see them through at the expense of their fellow Celts, and Ireland will have to pick themselves up both emotionally and physically to meet the challenge.

Unlike the battle in Paris, the other game of the weekend unfortunately did not live up to the hype. Wales and Australia resumed a rivalry filled with close finishes and unpredictability, but in reality Australia never fired a shot despite a loss all but assuring their exit at the pool stage with a game to go. Wales took the lead early when their outstanding captain Jac Morgan burst through the Australian midfield off a set play, finding scrum-half Gareth Davies on his inside for an easy stroll under the posts. Australia then had what was probably their best period of the game as they held possession and pushed deep into Wales territory. After kicking one penalty, they had another to get within 1 point of Wales, but crucially opted to go for the corner. They would never come as close, as Wales turned them over and hoofed the ball downfield, only denied a length-of-the-field try by an unlucky bounce of the ball. From there, it was one way traffic, even as veteran out-half Dan Biggar departed the field of play with a shoulder injury, his replacement Gareth Anscombe ably filling his boots and then some, as he punished Aussie indiscipline to the tune of 23 points. Wales turned the screw and exerted endless pressure on their outmatched opponents, running in two further tries through Nick Tompkins and the aforementioned Morgan to record a 40-6 thumping of the men from Down Under, Wales’ best ever result against Australia by some margin.

This match was an intriguing barometer of how far the two teams had come since their last meeting, a 39-34 comeback victory for Australia at the Principality Stadium in Cardiff last November. It is remarkable that that was both Wayne Pivac and Dave Rennie’s last game in charge of Wales and Australia respectively, as both coaches were relieved of their duties shortly after. In Wales’ case, a change was needed as Pivac’s men had been woeful for some time, and there are few better men than Warren Gatland at turning a team around at short notice. In 2007, Wales failed to qualify for the World Cup quarter-finals. Gatland was appointed after the tournament, and Wales would go on the win the Grand Slam in the 2008 6 Nations. It appears, a year on from his reappointment, that he has done it again, as Wales are now in line for a semi-final appearance, a scarcely believable outcome given the persistent problems in Welsh rugby. For Australia, many fans are left scratching their heads and wondering where it all went wrong, because they certainly won’t be getting any answers from Eddie Jones. Despite the odd poor result, Australia had seemed to be building nicely under Rennie, as they pushed France and Ireland all the way last November. However, for a game struggling for relevance in a sports-mad country, the allure of the brash, enigmatic Jones was too great and they pulled the trigger almost immediately after he was fired from his role as England coach. Since then it is hard to see any improvement whatsoever, and it’s fair to say they have regressed from this time last year. There are reports floating around that Japan are attempting to woo Jones back to the Land of the Rising Sun, but he is so far giving nothing away. Watch this space.

## Ryder Die
Golf’s usual strokeplay format(where fewest total shots taken dictates the winner) has given way to the two jewels of the matchplay format, the Solheim Cup(women) and the Ryder Cup(men). In both competitions the best 12 golfers from Europe take on 12 of the best that the United States have to offer, as the players ditch the individual mindset to become part of a team for one weekend every 2 years. The teams are composed of 6 players who qualify automatically through their performances throughout the year, and 6 players hand-picked by each team’s non-playing captain, who is usually a former star of the competition.

The cups have 5 sessions with 3 different matchplay formats. Foursomes sees 4 players go out together, 2 for each team, and teammates take alternating shots. To win a hole, a pairing must achieve a lower score on the hole than the opposing pairing, and the winning team is the pairing who wins the most holes over the course of the 18 holes(shock). Fourballs is very similar, except each player plays their own ball, so it lasts longer than the foursomes. The player who shoots the lowest score on a hole wins that hole for his team. On Friday and Saturday, each day has one session of foursomes and one session of fourballs, with each session made up of 4 different pairings from each team, meaning there are 4 points on offer from each session. The Europeans are typically stronger in foursomes, the Americans in the fourballs, and many contribute this to Europe being considered more tight-knit than their American counterparts, although I’m not sure that is the case in reality.

It is all decided on Sunday with the final format, singles, in which all 12 players from each team take to the course. As you can probably tell from the name ‘singles’, each player goes one-on-one against a member of the opposite team. Strategy here is all-important, as momentum can play a huge role. The sight of a lot of blue, or red, on the scoreboard can be a powerful motivator and captains sometimes top-load their order with their best players. However, each game is worth the same amount of points, so it is vital to have strength throughout the team and ensure each player gets out at least once over the first two days. Many blame Europe’s collapse in the 1999 Ryder Cup on a failure to play any of their Cup rookies in the first two days, leaving them lambs to the slaughter in the Sunday singles as the USA roared back from 10-6 down the claim a famous victory.

In total, there are 28 points on offer. In the Solheim Cup, which took place at Finca Cortesin in Spain’s Costa del Sol, Europe, as the holders, went in knowing 14 points were required to retain the Cup. They got off to a disastrous start, as the US whitewashed them in Friday morning’s foursomes session to put them in a 4-0 hole. A fight back in the afternoon fourballs saw them end the first day down 5-3, and they took another 3-1 victory in the same session the following day to leave the competition finely poised at 8-8 going into Sunday, the Saturday morning foursomes having been split 2-2. European captain Suzann Pettersen knew a fast start was necessary but for large parts of Saturday it looked as if the USA would reach the 14.5 points required to wrest control of the trophy back from the Europeans. However, led by Cavan’s own Leona Maguire(7 wins, 2 losses and 1 halve across her two Solheim Cup appearances), Europe turned the tide, and captain’s pick Caroline Hedwall produced a stunning fight back to win her match having been 3 down after 12 holes, birdying 5 of the last 6. It fell to Spaniard Carlota Ciganda to get Europe to the magic 14 points, and she delivered birdies on 16 and 17 in the penultimate match to win her point and keep the Cup on this side of the Atlantic.

This weekend, it is over to the men at the Marco Simone Golf Club just outside of Rome, with the US coming in as holders and strong favourites having defeated Europe by a record 19-9 margin in Wisconsin 2 years ago. The course itself is a matchplay dream, featuring 3 drivable par-4s and par-5s that are very reachable in 2. On paper, the US team is far stronger and more experienced, but Europe(last time out notwithstanding) tend to be more than the sum of their parts. Also in their favour is an excellent home record, the Americans having not recorded a victory in Europe in exactly 30 years. They will not want to be the ones to lose that streak, and the closer the first tee shot on Friday morning gets, the more optimistic I feel about Europe’s chances. Whatever the result, drama and entertainment is guaranteed, and the crowd will bring an atmosphere more akin to the Stadio Olimpico than a golf course. And a special thanks to the Rugby World Cup schedulers for giving Ireland this weekend off, as I’m not sure my heart could handle the combined stress!

## The Next Great American Dynasty?
Worlds collided on Sunday as news swept the (American)football and pop music fanbases that Taylor Swift would be attending the Kansas City Chiefs' game against the Chicago Bears from star tight-end Travis Kelce’s suite at Arrowhead Stadium. Kelce, who has a podcast with his brother Jason(who plays for the Philadelphia Eagles), has frequently joked about wanting to date the pop icon, and it appears she has taken him up on it. The TV cameras picked her out early and often from her seat besides Kelce’s mother Donna, and no doubt the viewing figures started to climb as videos circulated on social media. Kelce’s Chiefs teammates did their utmost to wingman their guy, running roughshod over a terrible Bears team, and eventually getting Kelce his touchdown, celebrated wildly by Swift. It seems her fans are on board with the couple at least, as Kelce's jersey sales have since skyrocketed. It was also the most-watched game of the weekend despite not being a marquee matchup or on in Primetime, which can hardly be attributed to a coincidence. The two were seen leaving together after the 41-10 pummelling, but time will tell whether they will be able to make it work with their busy schedules.

Elsewhere in the league, the high-flying Dolphins opted not to kick a field goal to tie the record for highest points scored in an NFL as they annihilated the Denver Broncos 70-20. The Dolphins offence has been close to unstoppable through 3 games, and they have put themselves firmly in the Super Bowl conversation. There were routine wins for the San Francisco 49ers and Philadelphia Eages in the NFC, while the Cincinnati Bengals finally secured their first win of the season. The New England Patriots managed to do the same, winning an ugly 15-10 divisional clash with the New York Jets, who are still reeling from the season-ending injury to Aaron Rodgers in Week 1. The biggest story of the week was the Dallas Cowboys' upset at the hands of the Arizona Cardinals. Going into the game, the Cowboys’ defence looked like the best in the league, while the Cardinals looked like the least talented team on paper. Of course that all meant nothing, as the Cardinals stunned the heavyweight Cowboys 28-16 in a game Dallas fans will hope is just an outlier, and not a sign of the mental frailties that they have become known for.

That's all for this week! Thank you for reading, and as always I would love to hear any thoughts/comments!

*A huge weekend for Europe and Rory*  
*Will Kelce and Swift continue their Love Story?*  
*Ireland now have a break*  
*But the Scottish attack may keep them awake*   
*Another match down in the pursuit of glory*  
