---
layout: post
title:  "The Uppercut - The World Cup Reaches the Final 4"
---
*You can subscribe to the Uppercut by following @simoonssnaps on Instagram, or by sending me your email to receive new post notifications.*

Welcome back to the Uppercut, where this week normal service is restored. In this edition, I'll be diving into the Women's World Cup, which is down to the final 4 teams, none of which have won the trophy before. Then, I'll be reviewing the weekend's Rugby World Cup warm-ups, which prompted plenty of debate and not for the right reasons. Finally, I'll look back on the opening round of the Premier League, which saw some teams get off the mark well, while others struggled to find their feet. As always, please don't hesitate to get in contact at theuppercutblog@gmail.com with any thoughts or comments!

## Masters of Evilda
When the final whistle ended Spain’s quarter-final against the Netherlands in Wellington, giving them a 2-1 victory over their continental rivals after 120 minutes of play, there was seemingly nothing untoward about their celebrations as they revelled in the achievement of reaching a first ever semi-final. However, there was one person conspicuous in his absence from the jubilant players: manager Jorge Vilda, who chose to embrace his coaching staff before subsequent footage appeared to show him being snubbed by his players. It is the latest chapter in a tumultuous 12 months for ‘La Roja’.

After a disappointing exit at the quarter-final stage of last year’s European Championships, 15 members of the squad wrote to the Spanish Football Federation to voice their disapproval of Vilda’s coaching methods and player management, which they said was having an effect on their mental well-being. Despite the group containing some of the top players in the world, the federation backed their man, who froze the mutinous 15 out of his squads. With Spain continuing to win games, the situation has rolled on into the World Cup. Although 3 players from the mutiny have been welcomed back into the squad, many of Spain’s best players will be watching Tuesday’s semi-final against Sweden from their couches, with La Roja seriously threatening to win a competition which has been blown wide-open since the USA’s shocking defeat at the hands of the aforementioned Swedes. With Sweden having rode their luck and boasting tournament pedigree, Tuesday’s showdown is sure to be a cracker.
*Update: After a dreary 80 minutes on Tuesday evening(local), both teams sprang to life in the final 10 minutes. Sweden responded immediately after Spain took the lead, but could only watch as La Roja’s Captain Olga Carmona scored one of the goals of the tournament with mere minutes to go, cuing wild celebrations(including Jorge Vilda) at the final whistle as Spain secured their spot in the final.*

Wednesday’s semi-final will reignite one of the world’s best international rivalries, as European champions England take on hosts Australia in Sydney. Having retained the Ashes on English soil(albeit in fortunate circumstances) and thumped England in the Netball World Cup final, Australia will be hoping to make it a trifecta of victories over their old enemy. They started the tournament in wobbly fashion, perhaps showing the pressure of hosting, and looked a very normal team without superstar Sam Kerr, injured on the eve of the tournament. However, a 4-0 victory over Olympic champions Canada saw them into the knockouts, where they backed up the blowout with a convincing 2-0 victory over Denmark. With Kerr making her tournament debut off the bench, the Matildas have captured the hearts and minds of the home fans, with each game being appointment viewing across the nation and resulting in rescheduled matches in other disciplines across the sports-mad country. The drama reached fever pitch on Saturday when they took on France with a spot in the semi-finals on the line, a goalless 120 minutes being followed by one of the wildest penalty shoot-outs in recent memory. With their talisman expected to make her first start of the tournament, Australian fans are one step away from the dream scenario of a home World Cup final.

Standing in their way are a battle-tested England, who for their part have also grown into the tournament, albeit in less eye-catching fashion. 3 wins from 3 in the group stage gave reason for great optimism, until England were shaken to their core by a thrilling Nigeria side who really should have taken the scalp of the European champions. England eventually prevailed in spot-kicks having just about held on, but the biggest story from the clash was Lauren James. The Chelsea forward had been in flying form at the tournament with 3 goals and 3 assists in the group stage, but lost her head towards the end of the 90 minutes of regulation, stamping on a Nigerian opponent after being on the end of a tough challenge. After VAR determined it was a straight red card, it was baffling to see James only receive a 2-match ban for her cynical play. Regardless, she will be relying on her teammates to earn her the chance for retribution, and they battled past a resilient Colombia side to book a date with the hosts, coming from a goal down to take victory, much to the dismay of Colombia’s wonderful travelling support, who have lit up the tournament by all accounts. And so the semi-finals are upon us, with a first time tournament winner guaranteed following Japan’s loss to Sweden. All to play for.

## House of Cards
Warm-up matches for the Rugby World Cup continued this past weekend, as the northern hemisphere teams(not including Ireland) looked to make up some of the game-time deficit to the southern hemisphere teams, whose summer-scheduled Rugby Championship tournament often sets them up well heading into rugby’s showpiece event. With rugby not really doing ‘friendlies’, these games can often be a tough watch as players look to avoid injuries and suspensions, and teams attempt to try out new gameplan tweaks without revealing their full hand. Watching the two main matches from this weekend, England vs Wales followed by France vs Scotland, it was not immediately clear they were the same sport such was the difference in quality.

On a dreary afternoon at Twickenham, England and Wales played out a predictably dull affair, notable mostly for the volume of cards doled out by Georgian referee Nika Amashukeli, who sent 5 players to the sin-bin, with one being upgraded to a red card. Wales briefly led with 15 minutes to play, but 12-man England came storming back to show that, with backs to the wall, they can still be a dangerous team. Their lack of a cohesive attack is a cause for genuine concern though, and England fans must be tearing their hair out at how such a large and talented player pool can produce such a mediocre team. Borthwick’s old-school, set-piece reliant gameplan looks out of place in an age where teams play at breakneck pace and every player can handle the ball.

Back to the action, where the brutal nature of the game began to take its toll to both coaches dismay. Wales captain Dewi Lake was forced off with a knee injury mid way through the first half, and they will face a nervy wait to see how much of a part he will be able to play in the World Cup, now just 3.5 weeks away. English scrum-half Jack van Poortvliet followed soon after, and it has already been announced that he will not recover from his ankle injury  in time for the tournament, a devastating blow for the 22-year old. That wasn’t the end to the attrition however, as Welsh number 8 Taine Plumtree was forced off with a shoulder injury just after the break. Still, he may have preferred his fate to that of his replacement and namesake Taine Basham. Midway through the 2nd half, Basham broke the line and ran at England captain Owen Farrell, who took his opponents surname a literal too literally, nearly beheading Basham in a picture-perfect example of the type of tackle World Rugby are trying to eliminate. Farrell was only sin-binned at the time, but it was upgraded to a full red upon review, and the question now is not if Farrell will miss some of the World Cup, but how much. Usually a first-time offender will miss around 2 games, given they show remorse and attend ‘tackle school’. However, Farrell is far from a first-time offender, and has already been to tackle school earlier this year, which clearly worked about as well as one would expect. Therefore Farrell is looking at anywhere between 4 and 8 games, although the consensus is probably somewhere in the middle. This leaves the England coaches with an interesting dilemma, having already named their World Cup squad; if the ban is lengthy, do they drop the captain in favour of a player who will be able to contribute sooner? Or is Farrell worthy of being brought along as a leader, ready to be brought into the starting XV as soon as permitted? I am very interested to see how George Ford goes against Ireland this week, as it is possible he is a better fit for this England team than Farrell, whose ban may turn out to be a blessing in disguise.

*Edit: On Tuesday morning, a World Rugby review board rescinded Farrell’s red card, leaving him free to play as early as this weekend. To me, this is a baffling decision, and a stunning indictment of World Rugby’s attitude to head injuries. While Taine Basham’s brain recovers from the collision(and who knows about the long-term consequences), the shoulder responsible will continue doling out hits. How 3 members of an independent panel managed to disagree with the vast majority of the rugby-watching public(including many English) is beyond me, and while the matter may be closed, I expect the debate around Farrell’s tackle to continue into the World Cup, especially if he is to have a big impact(no pun intended).*

Across the English Channel, a free-flowing game between Scotland and France in Paris showcased some of the best rugby has to offer, as France ran out narrow winners by a score line of 30-27 despite a fierce Scottish comeback. Scotland had the better of the early exchanges, but trailed by 3 at the midpoint as the French, roared on by an expectant crowd, grew into the game, many of their front-line players getting their first run out since last season. After the break, the French were devastatingly ruthless, running in 2 tries in quick succession, one of them a 60-metre counter-attack for the highlight reel, to seemingly put the game on ice. However, in a warning sign to their rivals, the Scots came roaring back with some scintillating rugby, displaying pristine accuracy to score 3 tries in 11 minutes and tie the scores up at 27-27. But like many Scottish comebacks, they couldn’t quite complete the job, with the automatic Thomas Ramos kicking a penalty in the dying minutes to seal victory.

While France were unplayable at times, it was clear they are still a work in progress as far as building for the World Cup is concerned. Scotland, who have had a longer pre-season, looked far closer to the finished product, but it was notable that their comeback came when the French were clearly tiring, and the French will be a much fitter team by the time the tournament rolls around. Scotland are notorious for spotting teams a big lead, before sparking into life and coming up just short. We’ll see if they can reverse that trend in a few weeks time. Perhaps the biggest thing to come out of this game was the injury to France’s mercurial out-half, Romain Ntamack. One of the most exciting players in the game, Ntamack limped off in the 55th-minute with an innocuous-looking injury, but on Monday morning France’s worst fears were confirmed: a ruptured ACL, which will end his World Cup before it has even begun. It is a crushing blow for Ntamack who will lose the chance to represent his nation at a home World Cup. France will now look to quality back-up Mathieu Jalibert, who is a more than capable replacement for Ntamack, but doesn’t possess quite the same symbiotic relationship with talismanic scrum-half Antoine Dupont. With prop Cyrill Baille also ruled out for at least the start of the tournament, the French will learn about their depth earlier than planned.

Irish focus will turn to the England match at the Aviva Stadium on Saturday, with much of Andy Farrell’s first-stringers set to return to the starting XV following a warm-weather camp in Portugal. I’ll be looking for a little more cohesion and quality than the last time out against Italy, but given the attrition seen over the weekend, making it through the match injury-free would be as big a boon to Ireland’s chances as any performance.

## Con-Toon-ders?
The opening weekend of the 23/24 Premier League season is in the books, and already pre-season predictions(including this writer’s) are being re-written. The most impressive performance came from Newcastle United, 4th last year, who dispatched a much-hyped Aston Villa with ease, running out 5-1 winners as striker Alexander Isak bagged a classy brace and new signings Sandro Tonali and Harvey Barnes got life in Tyneside off to the best possible start. After this performance, Newcastle perhaps look best place to be Manchester City’s closest rivals this season, displaying the sort of aggression and ability to keep possession that could cause the holders serious problems. However, reading into week 1 performances is a dangerous game, and cleverer pundits than I have been suckered in by early hype-trains only to be left red-faced come the end of the season.

One genuine cause for concern for Manchester City is the loss of their midfield maestro, Kevin de Bruyne. The hamstring injury that forced the Belgian off in the Champions League final reared its ugly head once again in their 3-0 win over Burnley, and he will now face a spell of up to 4 months on the sideline. While City’s depth is unmatched, even they will struggle to replace a player of his quality, and suddenly the other top teams will be smelling blood. Rodri and Bernardo Silva will be expected to step into the playmaking role in the short term, but I suspect City may look to the market for a replacement before the window closes. One man who will now be relied on even more heavily is Erling Haaland, who looked in imperious form on Friday night. Bagging two goals in the first half, Haaland looked in mid season form, his strikers instincts on point with two lovely finishes from inside the box. Until the other contenders learn how to stop Haaland, they will continue to battle for best-of-the-rest status.

In London, Chelsea and Liverpool played out an entertaining 1-1 draw which highlighted both sides’ midfield frailties. In the first half, Luis Dias got on the end of a sumptuous Mo Salah pass to put Liverpool ahead after a sustained period of dominance, but Chelsea struck back through new defender Alex Disasi. Despite some gilt-edged chances(and a disallowed goal for each side), that was the end of the scoring, and both sides will be wondering how much their attacking flow was done to the other’s defensive incompetence. In the time since, Chelsea have spent nearly £200m beefing up their midfield with the signings of Moises Caicedo(Brighton) and Romeo Lavia(Southampton), both young stars with huge potential. While this is hugely exciting as a Chelsea fan, the excessive spending from the club feels uncomfortable, and I hope to see them focusing on offloading players from their bloated squad in the next 2 weeks. Otherwise, they face the prospect of becoming like Manchester City in the eyes of opposing fans, where any success is greeted with a disinterested shrug amid accusations of ‘buying the league’. Not an exciting prospect if I’m being honest.

The remaining big-hitters, Arsenal and Manchester United, got off to solid, if unconvincing, wins at home against Nottingham Forest and Wolves respectively. I’m not reading too much into their struggles against two sides who will be fighting for safety come the end of the season as the first few weeks of the season are often like an extended pre-season, as teams look to find their flow and identify their best starting XI. Arsenal dominated their encounter for the most part before a sloppy end saw Forest nearly snatch a point. United, on the other hand, were incredibly lucky to escape with 3 points after their new goalkeeper, Andre Onana, clattered into Wolves forward Sasa Kalajdzic in the final minutes of the game, missing the ball entirely. Only for the grace of VAR did Onana evade punishment, but the match officials were not so lucky; after deeming the incident not worthy of review, the referee, VAR and assistant VAR were dropped from the slate of games this coming weekend. Players aren’t the only ones who must keep performing at the highest level.

## Overtime
### The Sinner Man
As attention turns towards the 4th and final Grand Slam of 2023, the US Open, Italian Jannik Sinner and American Jessica Pegula won the Men’s and Women’s titles at the Canadian Open in straight sets. Pegula had defeated tough opponents in Coco Gauff and Iga Swiatek before despatching Russian Liudmila Samsonova in less than an hour in the final, while Sinner saw off the challenge of Australian Alex de Minaur after world no.1 Carlos Alcaraz lost for the first time since June at the quarter-final stage. All eyes will be on the young Spaniard at Flushing Meadows in New York as he looks to defend his title, won last year when Novak Djokovic was not present. On the women’s side of the draw, Iga Swiatek will once again enter as favourite, having also won last year’s iteration.

### Jets Ready to Cook?
The NFL pre-season is underway, and there is perhaps no team more hyped than the New York Jets. While teams like the Cincinnati Bengals, Kansas City Chiefs, Philadelphia Eagles and San Francisco 49ers are likely to represent the cream of the crop when the season starts on September 7th, the New York Jets have combined a batch of young superstars with veteran excellence at key positions to create the most exciting team in New Jersey since they last made the playoffs in 2010. Having secured the services of stroppy-but-legendary quarterback Aaron Rodgers and experienced running-back Dalvin Cook, the Jets will be hoping the last year’s Offensive and Defensive Rookies of the Year, Garrett Wilson and Ahmad ‘Sauce’ Gardner, can reach an even higher level with a year of experience under their belt. If they do, the Jets are a scary prospect for the AFC East, which includes my beloved Patriots(outlook for this season? **Poor**), and indeed the rest of the league.

As always, thanks for reading, a I'll sign off with a limerick:
*Farrell got away scot-free*  
*The same can't be said for Chelsea's spending spree*  
*A tough break for Ntamack*  
*But I've no doubt he'll be back*  
*Will Vilda be covered in glory?*
