---
layout: post
title:  "The Uppercut - A Fitting Finale"
---
*You can also listen to an audio version of this article on Souncloud! [Click here to listen!](https://soundcloud.app.goo.gl/dY3WwTXc4VGG457g9)*

*You can subscribe to the Uppercut by following @simoonssnaps on Instagram, or emailing @theuppercutblog@gmail.com to receive new post notifications.*

Welcome back to the Uppercut, and apologies for the late post this week! In this edition, I’ll be digging into the Manchester derby and the rest of the past weekend’s Premier League results, and also check in on the Irish football team since the post-World Cup sacking of Vera Pauw. But of course, the main event last weekend was the final of the 2023 Rugby World Cup, a tournament that will be remembered as bittersweet from an Irish perspective. I give my thoughts on the final and the tournament as a whole, and briefly discuss where Ireland go from here. Enjoy!

## Bokking All Over the World
After what was, and certainly felt like, the longest Rugby World Cup ever, it finally came down to the two teams who had succeeded on this stage more than any other. Pre-tournament predictions of Northern Hemisphere domination, or even a new winner, had been long forgotten by the time the All Blacks and Springboks descended on the Stade de France on a wet Saturday night in Paris. The greatest rivalry in world rugby was about to resume, with its most high-stakes iteration since their one previous Final meeting in 1995. On that occasion, South Africa rode the wave of post-apartheid emotion to defeat Jonah Lomu’s New Zealand to claim the title on home soil, leaving us with the indelible image of Nelson Mandela handing Francois Pienaar the William Webb Ellis trophy. In the time since, both nations had claimed two world titles each, and now the longtime adversaries would do battle for the honour of being the first nation to win 4 World Cups. The stage was set.

The match started disastrously for New Zealand as flanker Shannon Frizell, not exactly a player with a sparkling reputation, got his breakdown clear-out of Springbok hooker Mbongeni Mbonambi all wrong. In attempting to roll Mbonambi off the ball, Frizell slipped onto the hooker’s knee, leaving Wayne Barnes little choice but to banish the flanker to the sin-bin for 10 minutes. Cruelly, Mbonambi couldn’t continue and was replaced after just 2 minutes, having only managed 20 minutes in the 2019 final, and on came 37-year old flanker-cum-hooker Deon Fourie for the biggest test of his career. Pollard converted the accompanying penalty to put the All Blacks in an early hole. Buoyed by the extra-man advantage, the Springboks showed no signs of weariness from their physical victory over England in the previous stage as they dominated the early collisions, lock Eben Etzebeth flattening All Blacks out-half Richie Mo’unga to lay down a marker. A few chances inside New Zealand’s ‘22 went begging before Pollard converted another penalty for a 6-0 lead. 

Restored to 15 men, New Zealand looked to play a more expansive game and began to gain a foothold in the Springboks’ half. They were rewarded for their enterprise with a penalty to cut the deficit to 3, but gave the points right back to South Africa with a penalty off the restart, Handre Pollard unflappable again. The All Blacks were unfazed, but a faltering line-out(something Irish fans can relate to) held them back before disaster, and Sam Cane, struck on the half-hour mark. The All Blacks’ skipper did not adjust his body height as he looked to make a big hit on centre Jesse Kriel, catching the Springbok flush in the head with his shoulder. Barnes again brandished a yellow card and signalled for a bunker review to decide whether it should be upgraded to a red. When the decision arrived a few minutes later that Cane would indeed be the first man to see red in a World Cup final, few would have been surprised. If New Zealand were going to claim their 4th World Cup, it would have to be by overcoming a 6-point deficit against the reigning World Champions, while playing 50 minutes with 14 men. They fought back well, and Mo’unga slotted another 3 points after Kurt-Lee Arendse brilliantly denied Rieko Ioane the first try of the night, but after the immense Pieter-Steph du Toit won Pollard another penalty moments before the break, one could have been excused for worrying that the game had already been decided.

Prior to the tournament, there was a feeling among many(myself included) that the All Blacks had lost their aura, that sense of inevitability that they would prevail. While I still believe this is true to some extent, certainly with regards to this crop of players, that is not to say that this is not still one hell of a rugby team, and there was no doubt that they would battle to the very end. They were handed a lifeline early in the 2nd half when the Springboks’ inspirational captain Siya Kolisi was shown the 3rd yellow card of the night for a high hit on World Rugby Player of the Year Ardie Savea. There was incidental head-on-head contact, but the majority of the force was through Savea’s chest, and the bunker review(correctly, in my opinion) adjudged that the card should remain a yellow. The All Blacks looked to convert Kolisi’s error into points, and Mo’unga made a wonderful break on the outside of South Africa’s rush defence before offloading to Aaron Smith for the night’s first 5-pointer. Or not. In the build up to the try, the TMO spotted a knock-on from New Zealand, and the try was overturned. While the knock-on was obvious, World Rugby rules state that the knock-on must occur within 2 phases of the try being scored in order for it to be overturned by the TMO. Given the knock-on was 4-5 phases before the try, the All Blacks would be justified in feeling hard done by on that one. However, they were instead awarded a penalty for an infringement at a lineout, and off the back of the territory gain, finally crossed the whitewash to close the gap to one point. Winger Mark Telea, excellent all night, bounced an offload 5 metres out for Beauden Barrett to scoop and score, becoming the first player to score in two different World Cup finals. Mo’unga couldn’t add the extras, but suddenly the game was in the balance.

It didn’t take Roger Federer and Novak Djokovic watching from the stands to know we were being served up an epic, and as the game entered the final quarter the tension was palpable. In the biggest moments, the All Blacks’ composure let them down with poor decision-making, while other attacks were repelled by Springbok brilliance, no moment more memorable than substitute Kwagga Smith ripping the ball clean off Will Jordan. A Jordie Barrett penalty from the halfway line slid agonisingly to the left after Wayne Barnes showed yet another yellow card, this time to a crestfallen Cheslin Kolbe for a deliberate knock-on to halt a New Zealand attack. The All Blacks mounted wave after wave of attack, but I was surprised to see no hint of a drop-goal on the occasions where they managed to get in range of the posts. Kolbe had his head in his jersey as New Zealand came forward one last time. Devastatingly, having played out of his skin all game, all tournament and all year, it was Ardie Savea who made the final mistake. Again the All Blacks stormed into drop-goal range, but Savea tried to do too much and his offloaded bobbled forward. South Africa secured the scrum, and with it, their 4th World Cup triumph.

The rugby community rarely agrees on much, but prior to the tournament few would have disputed that the triumphant All Blacks team of 2015, featuring legendary names like Richie McCaw, Dan Carter and Ma’a Nonu, were the greatest team of all time. This Springboks victory has challenged that assertion far sooner than expected. This vintage not only won the title in 2019(like that New Zealand team did in 2011), but they faced arguably the toughest ever route to victory in the 36-year history of the World Cup. They faced 5 of the top 6 teams in the world(they themselves being the other), losing only to Ireland in the pool stage, and rattled off 3 successive 1-point victories against France, England and New Zealand. It seems silly just thinking about it given the ‘any given day’ nature of rugby. They are deserved champions, and while their style is not the easiest on the eye, that is the South African way and it is up to the rest of the world to adapt. Their coaching staff revel in chaos, and their defence was nothing short of suffocating. Their championship mindset, utter self-belief and determination are something that every nation can learn from. In 4 years time, it is hard to see them not being the bookies’ favourites to make it a 3-peat.

Despite the lopsided group stage results, and the time it took to complete that phase of the tournament, this may go down as the best World Cup yet simply due to the knockout stage. The New Zealand-Argentina semi-final aside, every game was a nail-biter, and the clashes between the top 4 nations lived up to the hype and then some. The quality on show was out of this world, and I know many people who would not usually be rugby fans that were utterly captivated by the events in France. It is up to World Rugby now to turn this momentum into tangible benefits for the game to ensure its long-term survival.

The Irish defeat at the quarter-final stage, in heartbreaking fashion to runners-up New Zealand, remains incredibly painful. In the biggest game, Ireland failed to produce their biggest performance, and the quarter-final curse continues for at least another 4 years. Getting over this will be an enormous challenge for Andy Farrell and his squad, as I’m sure not one of them actually believes Johnny Sexton’s ‘we lost, but we won’ sentiment from his farewell Instagram post(Sexton himself included). From the outside, all we can do as fans is to get behind them once again as they go into next year’s 6 Nations. Being a fan means following your team through thick and thin, not just when the good times are rolling, and I’m expecting that to shine through at the Aviva next Spring.

## What’s the Deal with the Devils?
A Manchester United team struggling for form welcomed their biggest rivals, Manchester City, to Old Trafford on Sunday for the first Manchester derby of the Premier League season. United have played second fiddle to City for a number of years but actually managed to win this fixture last year, giving fans hope that they may defy the odds again. Despite clearly underperforming in regards to the quality of their squad, United had managed to grind out a few wins in recent weeks that could have gone either way, the most recent of a which a 1-0 victory in the Champions League at home to FC Copenhagen. City, meanwhile, had been quietly going about their business, racking up the wins without really blowing any team away, but had recently lost 2 of their last 3. Was it time for a coming out party?

Both sides had chances in the early exchanges, United grateful to their goalkeeper Andre Onana for denying Haaland on the goal line, while Ederson was alert to block a Scott McTominay rocket at the other end. The under-appreciated Scot has been one of United’s few bright spots in their past few weeks, popping up with vital goals and keeping bigger names on the substitutes’ bench. The first goal came in somewhat controversial circumstances, as Rodri went tumbling under an innocuous challenge from United striker Rasmus Hojlund as the ball was floated into the United box. Referee Paul Tierney ignored Rodri’s pleas initially, but Michael Oliver soon radioed in from the VAR room to ask him to take another look. In my opinion, it was a foul, but fighting in the box happens so regularly that it was a shock that the penalty was awarded, especially given it required an intervention from VAR. There will be hundreds of similar incidents across the Premier League season that will not result in a near-guaranteed goal, so the real problem I have here is in the consistency. City weren’t complaining though, and Erling Haaland coolly sent Onana the wrong way to open the scoring.

United were on the back foot now, and City were suddenly finding lots of space in the United 3rd of the field. A beautiful dink from Bernardo Silva saw Onana again deny Haaland from point-blank range, though the striker should have scored. He wouldn’t make the same mistake twice when he was presented with a near carbon-copy of that chance, this time placing the ball where Onana was coming from to give him no chance at adjusting, doubling City’s lead shortly into the 2nd half in the process. It was pretty much one-way traffic from there as United’s defending left much to be desired, City’s profligacy in front of goal the only reason they weren’t long out of sight. Marcus Rashford dragged a shot that could have halved the deficit narrowly wide, and City struck again 10 minutes from time as Haaland turned provider, unselfishly sliding the ball to Phil Foden to finish in an empty net. 

A sobering result for United fans, as this clash showed just how far off their rivals they still are. For the first time in his 15-month tenure as United’s manager, Erik Ten Hag is under serious pressure to turn things around. His signings have not panned out for the most part, with his two most expensive transfers in Antony and Mason Mount starting the game on the sidelines, and he has so far failed to bring the flowing style of play synonymous with his time at Ajax to the north-west of England. Calls for his removal are certainly premature, but his seat in the dugout is beginning to get rather warm. It didn’t help that this was, in my opinion, City’s best game of the year, as their vision and skill caused United’s defence all sorts of issues. Haaland is back scoring goals, and with the return of John Stones in recent weeks, they once again look the scariest prospect in club football.

For now though, they sit in 3rd, 2 points off leaders Spurs and behind Arsenal on goals scored, with both teams claiming wins this past weekend. Spurs escaped a tricky fixture away to Crystal Palace on Friday with a 2-1 win, while Eddie Nketiah’s first Premier League hat-trick(the 3rd being the pick of the bunch) saw Arsenal obliterate relegation-threatened Sheffield United 5-0 at the Emirates. Elsewhere, it is one step forward, two steps back for Chelsea at the moment, as they entertained Brentford at Stamford Bridge for a West London derby. Coming off 2 wins and a promising 2-2 draw with Arsenal, hopes were high that the Blues were beginning to turn a corner. Instead, their inability to convert any of the gilt-edged chances they created(a feature of this club going back 2 years now) kept Brentford in the game, and they were no where near as wasteful when given a sniff, running out 2-0 victors on a day to forget for Chelsea fans. Liverpool dispatched 16th-placed Nottingham Forest 3-0 to keep pace with the leaders, Mo Salah’s delayed pass for their 2nd goal a particular highlight, while 5th-placed Aston Villa kept up their sublime form by easing past newcomers Luton Town 3-1. Two of the form teams in the league in Newcastle and Wolves, both unbeaten in their last 5 games, played out an entertaining 2-2 draw at Molineux. You may remember Wolves were in chaos a few months ago as manager Julen Lopetegui resigned on the eve of the season, replaced by Gary O’Neil who had been unfortunate to be let go by Bournemouth. O’Neil has steered Wolves to 12th in the league, and masterminded what must have been a sweet victory over his former club last weekend. He even had the audacity to appear on Sky on Monday Night Football to break down exactly how he dismantled the Cherries. A deserved victory lap, but he should remember that pride comes before a fall, and 12th in November guarantees nothing in the Premier League.

The final word goes to the Ireland women’s team, who have shown no ill-effects from their split from manager Vera Pauw following the World Cup. Competing in Nations League Tier B, Ireland have rattled off 4 wins in a row under interim manager Eileen Gleeson, seeing off Northern Ireland, Hungary and Albania twice and scoring 13 goals in the process. Captain Katie McCabe has been in great form for Arsenal and scored 4 across those internationals, with the results meaning that Ireland have earned promotion to the top tier of the Nations League with 2 games to spare. It is great to see them kicking on from their World Cup experience, and they are in with an excellent chance of not just qualifying for, but making an impact at, what would be their first European Championships in Switzerland in 2025.

That’s all for this week, as always thanks for reading and don’t hesitate to get in touch!

*It’s more glory for the green and gold*  
*For whom winning will never get old*  
*Manchester remains blue*  
*But that’s not saying anything new*  
*Better wrap up, it’s beginning to get cold*  
