---
layout: post
title:  "The Uppercut - New Zealand Put Down a Marker"
---

Welcome back to the Uppercut, where this week I’ll be looking back at Ireland’s first ever Women’s World Cup, an All-Ireland triumph for Dublin and an Ashes test series for the ages, as well as checking in on the build-up to the Rugby World Cup. As a reminder, you can get updates for when this blog posts by following me on Instagram at @simoonssnaps, or by dropping me your email to receive a notification for new posts!

## Back in Black?
New Zealand maintained their vice-like grip on the Bledisloe Cup as they dispatched Eddie Jones’ struggling Australia in Melbourne in the last round of this year’s truncated Rugby Championship, running out 38-7 winners in an impressive display. Scott Barrett’s bone-crunching tackle on Wallaby scrum-half Tate McDermott in the 3rd minute, which allowed team-mate Shannon Frizell to touch the ball down over the line, set the tone for the game as the Kiwis showed the gulf in class between the two teams. Going into half-time at 19-7, the All Blacks weathered a storm early in the 2nd half before putting their hosts to the sword as only they can, running in 3 tries in 8 minutes to put the game out of reach with some scintillating rugby, claiming the Rugby Championship title in the process.

Without a doubt, New Zealand had looked the most impressive team in the tournament as they look to bounce back from a dismal 2022(by their standards). A string of poor results both home and away, coupled with uncertainty at the coaching position, had the All Blacks looking as vulnerable as they ever have in my time watching rugby. However, having their aura of invincibility broken was never going to sit well with the rugby-mad public, and a reaction was inevitable. Utilising the skills of Richie Mo'unga and Beauden Barrett in a 10-15 axis, New Zealand showed some lovely patterns of play that would look familiar to anyone who has watched Irish rugby over the last few years. Coupled with aggression and accuracy at the breakdown, and their seemingly endless conveyor belt of insanely athletic talent, they will be a force to be reckoned with at the World Cup. Despite this, I don’t think it is all doom and gloom for their competitors. New Zealand were easily the freshest team going into the tournament, and had the most stability in the team besides perhaps South Africa. They were also lucky to catch Argentina in the 1st round, as the Pumas grew into the tournament, culminating in a phenomenal performance against South Africa in Johannesburg as they came up just short in a 22-21 defeat to the reigning World Champions. (Side note: Argentina may be the strongest team in their half of the World Cup draw. Don’t be surprised to see them in a semi-final in Paris in a couple months’ time). New Zealand will celebrate their Rugby Championship victory as they should, but I don’t think we will know how far they have come until they take on hosts and tournament favourites France in the group stage.

Back on this side of the globe, Ireland’s World Cup build-up kicks into high gear this weekend when they take on Italy at the Aviva Stadium. While teams usually experiment during these games, bad performances can often be a harbinger of things to come, as the 07’ and 19’ vintages can attest to. Both teams had high expectations going into their World Cup warm-ups, but a narrow victory over minnows Italy at home in 2007 and a heavy defeat at Twickenham in 2019 both revealed weaknesses that would scupper our chances when the main event finally rolled around. With that in mind, here are some of the main things I’ll be looking for over the coming weeks.

### Gameplan Evolution
Ireland have been the greatest exponents of attacking rugby over the last 2 years, deploying a vast array of decoy runners and playing at breakneck speed to breakdown their opponents. However, this game plan has occasionally been stifled, most notably by Australia in last year’s Autumn Internationals and England in the last outing of this year’s 6 Nations. While some of the struggles in the latter game can be attributed to the nerves of trying to secure a first Grand Slam on home soil, the stakes will be no less high come the World Cup. With that in mind, I will be looking for signs of evolution over the next few weeks without them revealing too much. Specifically, how will they respond if an opponent defends with lightning quick line-speed as England did, or holds the ball for long periods as Australia did.

### Crowley vs. Byrne
With Johnny Sexton, at 38, unlikely to withstand the rigours of a full World Cup, especially if Ireland are to go far, it could be up to his backup to keep the ship afloat and steer the team home. This makes the battle for the 22 jersey the most intriguing in the current squad, as both Munster’s Jack Crowley and Leinster’s Ross Byrne will look to put in major performances to convince the coaching ticket of their ability to handle the reigns in the event of a Sexton injury. Sexton’s suspension for berating the referees following Leinster’s Champions Cup final defeat to La Rochelle provides the perfect opportunity for both to showcase their respective skills. In my opinion, Crowley, at just 23, has the X-factor required to win the biggest games, as he showed by leading Munster to the URC title against the odds, including a match-winning drop-goal against Leinster. Byrne on the other hand is the known commodity, a quality kicker and game-manager. But we know Byrne’s ceiling, and I believe it will be good news for Ireland if Crowley is to emerge as the clear number 2 option behind Sexton.

### Back-Row Combinations
Blessed with some of the best back-row talent in the world, it will be fascinating to see how Andy Farrell, Paul O’Connell and company look to utilise them. In Caelan Doris and Jack Conan, Ireland have two of the best Number 8s in the world, while Tadhg Beirne and Ryan Baird represent a rare athleticism that sees them able to play both Second-Row and Number 6. That is not even to mention reigning World Player of the Year Josh Van der Flier, whose consistently excellent performances are at this stage taken for granted. 

During the 6 Nations, Farrell opted for balance, with the experience of Peter O’Mahony at 6, alongside Van der Flier and Doris. They were the best back-row in the competition, and until suffering an injury against Scotland Doris could have been Player of the Tournament. Conan stepped in admirably in his absence, displaying the kind of form that saw him named the Lions Number 8 in 2021. I don’t see any way Doris is not in the team barring injury, with the only question being whether he is deployed at 6 or 8. O’Mahony’s grit, heart and brilliance in the lineout are hard to replace, but there is an argument to be made for Conan’s dynamism or Baird’s freakish athleticism offering more in general play. With Beirne almost certain to start alongside James Ryan in the second-row, two of Conan, Baird and O’Mahony will have to settle for being sprung from the bench. With O’Mahony a better starter than bench player, I can see Farrell sticking to his tried and tested. Whatever the eventual selection, the back-row is an area of extreme strength for this Irish outfit.

## Broad Stokes
In the end, it was a fitting finale to Stuart Broad’s glittering England test career, one that has spanned 16 years and half as many British Prime Ministers. In the 5th and final test of this year’s epic Ashes series, at the Oval ground in London, Broad smacked a 6 with the last ball he faced as a batsman and took the final wicket of the match with his last ever ball as a bowler to secure a 49-run win for England, ensuring the series would end in a draw. Broad’s tally of 604 test wickets is the 5th-most in the all-time list, and is the 2nd most by an Englishman, just behind his partner-in-crime James Anderson for whom this was also like to be his final test.

There were periods in this match when it looked like Australia may rain on Broad’s parade. Like every test in this enthralling series, the game ebbed and flowed, both sides looking like they had the upper hand only for the other to come roaring back. In the 1st innings, England looked certain to hold the advantage at the midway point having reached 283 and getting Australia to 185-7. However, Australia’s tail-enders managed an incredible 110 runs(considering all are specialist bowlers) to lead by 12 going into the 2nd innings. The momentum swung yet again as England put on a batting clinic led by Joe Root, leaving Australia to chase a seemingly insurmountable 384. However, the Aussie openers didn’t get the memo, as Khawaja and Warner, both likely playing in their final Ashes test like the Broad-Anderson duo for England, raced out to 135-0, once again tipping the scales in their favour.

Having been cursing the weather and their luck after rain cost them victory in the 4th test, it was England’s turn to be grateful when the heavens opened on Sunday afternoon. Unable to generate any bowling threat up to that point, the break gave England a chance to regroup and on Day 5 they came out swinging, taking 3 early wickets as the ball swung in the overcast conditions. Australia were not out for the count however, as Steve Smith and Travis Head steadied the ship and then some, reaching 264-3 and bringing the tourists to within 120 runs of a famous series victory on foreign soil with 7 wickets to go. But the British weather had not finished wreaking havoc just yet, causing a break in play at the midway point of the final day. Play resumed at 4:20pm, with maybe 3 hours of play left before the game would be declared a tie. There followed possibly the best spell of bowling the series had seen, as Moeen Ali, who had come temporarily out of retirement specially for this series, and Player of the Series Chris Woakes combined to take 30-5 as Australia collapsed to 294-8. Enter Stuart Broad. Most famous for his performances in the Ashes throughout the years, a pantomime villain to Australians, there was an air of inevitability around the crowd as captain Ben Stokes asked him to see the team home. Stokes himself had made a big call to not take a new ball when England were struggling, instead backing his spin and seam bowlers to keep the Aussie batters guessing. Broad, for one last time, took the final two wickets to deservedly tie the series, leaving the field to rapturous applause from all in attendance, his opponents from Down Under included. You couldn’t write it.

## Katie’s Korner
While statistics can offer a fascinating glimpse into the nuances of sport, they can often be misleading or not tell the whole story. The latter was certainly the case when the final whistle went in Brisbane on Monday evening(local time). Ireland’s World Cup: Played 3, Won 0, Drew 1, Lost 2; 1 goal scored, 3 goals conceded; Ireland knocked out in the group stage. While Ireland are indeed heading home from their first Women’s World Cup earlier than they would have liked, it is with their heads held high, after pushing Australia and Canada(both top-10 ranked teams) all the way in narrow defeats, before securing their first ever World Cup point in a 0-0 draw with Nigeria, who will progress to the knockout stage alongside Australia. The nation should be immensely proud of the team, who refused to be daunted by the odds and left it all out on the pitch. Captain Katie McCabe’s ‘Olimpico’ goal, direct from a corner in the early minutes of the match against Canada, will live long in the memory not just for the sheer audacity and skill required to pull it off, but as the first of what we hope will be many goals at World Cup Finals.

Looking ahead, it is hard to imagine we will not see this Ireland team at another major tournament in the near future, be it the European Championships in 2025, or the next World Cup in 4 years’ time. In McCabe and Denise O’Sullivan, Ireland have genuine stars, and the defensive structures are such that Ireland will be in with a chance in every game they play. Success breeds success, and younger generations are sure to be desperate to break into the team and share in the limelight.

It is not all sunshine and daisies however, as a feud late in the Nigeria game between McCabe and coach Vera Pauw threatened to overshadow the positive result. Pauw revealed later that McCabe had requested fresh legs so Ireland could push for a win, but had refused to do so believing Ireland’s approach was the right move for the time. Regardless of who is in the right, it is not a good look for either captain or coach, and this takes place against the backdrop of Pauw’s contract not having yet been renewed by the FAI. One might think that keeping the coach who led Ireland to their first ever World Cup would be a no-brainer, but the abuse allegations against her, coupled with a lack of public backing from her players, has cast significant doubt over whether she will be charged with steering Ireland to a first appearance at the European Championships. Clarity may only come when the FAI complete their post-tournament review, due at some point in August.

Around the tournament, favourites the USA have looked far from the heights that saw them win the last two iterations, scraping through to the knockouts after draws with Portugal and the Netherlands. They seem to lack any cohesion, relying instead on the individual brilliance of a few players to carry them through. Much more impressive have been European champions England. Having struggled slightly in their opener, they have grown into the tournament and have dispatched Denmark and China with relative ease, led by the irresistible Lauren James. But perhaps the biggest surprise team so far, and a genuine dark horse to go all the way, are Japan. Their energy and skill have seen them take a maximum 9 points from the group stage, including a 4-0 demolition of powerhouses Spain. With the USA having come back to the field, the World Cup is all to play for.

## Dublin’s Day
Stephen Cluxton’s dramatic return from retirement had a fairytale ending at Croke Park on Sunday, as Dublin knocked off reigning champions Kerry to win their 31st All-Ireland Football Championship. In a back-and-forth affair where scoring was limited, Cluxton was perfect with his kickouts and kicked 2 points as Dublin took advantage of some uncharacteristic mistakes by the Kingdom to run out narrow victors by a scoreline of 1-15 to 1-13, much to the delight of the local fans. For those who had made the trip up from Kerry, it would have been a long trip home as they pondered what could have been.

In a contest billed as a 50-50 by the bookies, it was Dublin who started the brighter, holding possession well and taking their chances when they came. Despite a few wides, they held a 3-point lead approaching half-time having bottled up superstar David Clifford, widely considered the best player in the game right now. However, they got a brutal reminder of his quality when Clifford played a pinpoint pass to Paul Geaney, who sat down Cluxton to fire into the goal and tie the game up.

This gave Kerry momentum starting the second half and they raced into a 3-point lead of their own, before carelessly giving the ball away to allow Paddy Small to cancel out Geaney’s goal, leaving the scores tied once again. If Kerry were shook by the goal, they did not show it, and quickly asserted their dominance again to restore their 3-point advantage. It was at this point that Dublin manager Dessie Farrell deployed his bench, and substitute Jack McCaffrey turned the tide for Dublin. In the final quarter, the ‘Championship minutes’ as some may say, Dublin outscored Kerry 0-7 to 0-2 as the Kingdom’s shooting boots deserted them, Clifford shooting wide on multiple occasions when looking sure to score. In injury time, Dublin struck twice to move them clear of Kerry, the final point scored by Dean Rock, Dublin’s 2nd leading points-scorer of all-time and a vital cog in Dublin’s dominance over the last 10 years. When the final whistle went, Dublin had their first All-Ireland title since 2020, but based on the players’ celebrations you might have thought it was a whole lot longer than that.

## Overtime
A round up of stories you may have missed from the world of sports…

### Handshake-Gate
Ahead of tennis’ final Grand Slam of the year, the US Open, spectators at the DC Open have been warned that Ukrainian player Elina Svitolina and Belarusian Victoria Azarenka will not shake hands. For Azarenka, who has come out publicly against the war, the warning is too little, too late after she was booed off-court following her match against Svitolina at this year’s Wimbledon.

### Hojlund Vs Haaland
Manchester United have completed the signing of striker Rasmus Hojlund from Atalanta for a fee of £72m as they look to close the gap on chief rivals Manchester City, who boast the best striker in the world in Erling Haaland. United have been searching for a top striker to lead their attack for some time, and it will be interesting to see how Hojlund adapts to the rigours of the Premier League. United are also expected to make a decision soon on whether to bring winger Mason Greenwood back into the fold. Greenwood has not played for United since January 2022 after being arrested on suspicion of attempted rape and assault, charges which have since been dropped. Despite this, I would not want Greenwood playing for my club having heard the voice recording that emerged around the time of his arrest. Dropped charges does not translate to innocence, and the footballing talents of a young man, however promising they may be, do not absolve him of his societal obligation to treat everyone with respect.

Be sure to come back next week for a bumper Premier League preview as I look ahead to what is sure to be another season full of twists, turns and spectacular goals. Thanks for reading!

*Dublin have won Sam*  
*New Zealand burst the Aussie dam*  
*We may be out of the World Cup*  
*But the heads are still up*  
*For my latest posts, check out the gram*  
