---
layout: post
title:  "The Uppercut - All Hail Fiji!"
---

*You can also listen to an audio version of this article on Souncloud! [Click here to listen!](https://on.soundcloud.com/fGBAXzbG7houGrBV9)*

*You can subscribe to the Uppercut by following @simoonssnaps on Instagram, or emailing @theuppercutblog@gmail.com to receive new post notifications.*

Welcome back to the Uppercut! It’s a slightly condensed edition this week as its a busy time in my side gig at the moment, but you’ll still find all you need to know about the return of the Premier League, an entertaining weekend in Formula 1, and of course, the 2nd round of games at the Rugby World Cup. Enjoy!

## Bundee Jump
Week 2 of the Rugby World Cup took place over the weekend as the varying abilities of different teams came into sharper focus. After an opening weekend packed with intriguing fixtures, this round was always going to be somewhat of a letdown given the number of heavyweight-versus-minnow clashes on the schedule, but there was still plenty of storylines to whet the appetite. The game of the weekend once again featured Fiji, fast becoming the most entertaining team in the competition, as they took on Eddie Jones’ Australia with a win for either team representing a huge step towards the knockout stages. Fiji were coming off a heartbreaking loss to the Welsh and knew another loss here would signal the end of their tournament, and against that backdrop they made an impressive start, with some Australian indiscipline seeing Fijian scrum-half Simione Kuruvoli give the Pacific Islanders a 12-8 lead at the break, the Aussies staying within touching distance thanks to an opportunistic try from Mark Nawaqanitawase after a quick line out off a 50-22. The try was against the run of play, and soon after the break the Fijian pressure payed off as Racing 92 centre Josua Tuisova punished the Wallabies’ inability to deal with a routine high ball, scoring his side’s only 5-pointer of the afternoon. 

A further penalty extended the lead to 22-8, but instead of pushing on and putting Australia to the sword, the occasion and magnitude of what they were on the verge of achieving seemed to get to Fiji as they lost all semblance of composure, inviting Aussie pressure onto themselves. Substitute back Suli Vunivalu gave the men in gold a sliver of hope, crossing the whitewash to make it a 7-point game. However, Fiji found enough in the tank the see out the win, cuing wild celebrations among Fijians and neutrals alike as they secured perhaps the biggest World Cup result in their history. With the 2 bonus points from their loss to Wales, Fiji are now in a very strong position to reach the quarter-finals for the first time since 2007, as they have the two weaker teams in the group in Georgia and Portugal as their remaining pool fixtures. Two bonus point victories will almost certainly see them progress, but it will be up to them to recreate the past two performances against weaker opposition. For Eddie Jones and the Wallabies, they don’t have long to figure out how they were so thoroughly outplayed by a team they haven’t lost to since the 1950s, as they take on Wales in a titanic clash on Sunday afternoon. Anything other than a win will all but guarantee a first ever pool-stage exit, which would represent a humiliation for the Australian Rugby Union and Eddie Jones ahead of home World Cup in 2027. Whatever the case, the Gatland-Jones dynamic in the lead-up to this game is sure to be thoroughly entertaining.

Irish eyes were smiling in Nantes on Saturday evening(but probably feeling rather heavy the next morning) as they improved upon their 82-8 demolition of Romania with an even more impressive 59-16 victory over Tonga. With the change in eligibility rules, Tonga have bolstered their ranks with a rake of former All Blacks and were expected to present a significantly tougher challenge than the Romanians as they made their tournament bow. Andy Farrell felt the same and named a near-full-strength side, eschewing the option of resting some frontline players ahead of the South Africa in favour of securing the win and improving the team’s cohesion in the process. Had there been more injuries than Finlay Bealham’s concussion shortly after coming off the bench(already cleared to play this coming week), it’s fair to expect there would have been more than a few people questioning the wisdom of the team selection, but as with most decisions during the Farrell era, he was spot on. Running in 8 tries and showing the sort of slick handling and defence-bursting set moves we have come to expect from this Ireland team, there can be no doubt that they have nailed their tournament build-up, and any notion that they would struggle against the physicality of the Tongans was swiftly dispelled as the Irish frequently got over the gainline and even crashed over the line for a maul try. The opening 20 minutes were cagey as Ireland looked the better side but couldn’t quite get things to click, the power and athleticism of the Tongans giving the men in green plenty to think about.

After a few chances in the opposition 22 went a-begging, it looked like only a matter of time before the Tongan resistance was broken, and so it proved when Johnny Sexton found Caelan Doris with a lovely inside skip pass, Doris feeding Tadhg Beirne to score under the posts. Attacking the interior of the Tongan defence was a theme all night and brought Ireland a lot of gainline success. Given the Springboks defend in much the same way, this was perhaps the most encouraging aspect of Ireland’s play, and one ventures that they have not yet shown their full hand. They will have to improve their work at the breakdown as that was where the Tongans had the most success, pilfering Irish ball in promising territory on a number of occasions. One of the moments of the evening came just before halftime as Ireland once again split open the interior of the Tonga defence, Murray darting through a gap before deftly offloading to Ringrose, who found the flying Sexton in support to score his 18th Irish try in 115 appearances, breaking Ronan O’Gara’s 10-year old Irish points record in the process. It was nothing less than Ireland’s talisman deserved, and having shown he is at the top of his game despite 6 months without a test match, the captain was promptly withdrawn from the fray to keep him fresh for next week. It was the man outside him who claimed Player of the Match, as Bundee Aki ran in two second-half tries in an all-action display that left no doubt as to who would be Ireland’s inside centre against the Boks. Aki appears to be in the form of his life, and his physical presence will be a massive boost against the enormous South Africans. 2 from 2 then, and Ireland could not ask to be in a better place as the real challenges begin to come thick and fast. They are in rude health and the attack is firing on all cylinders, with even the shaky lineout worries largely banished following an excellent showing at the weekend. There are no easy games from here on in, but Ireland have shown they will not roll over easily. It may come back to haunt me, but I like Ireland by 3 on Saturday.

The rest of the weekend’s games passed without too much fuss, as Samoa, Uruguay and Portugal made their first appearances of the tournament. Samoa played out a tight first half with tournament debutants Chile before showing their class in the second, running out 43-10 winners in a performance sure to make English and Argentinian fans sweat a little. Uruguay and Portugal, heavy underdogs against Tier 1 nations France and Wales, showed that they are not simply here for a holiday, both playing with wonderful freedom as they caused their illustrious opponents all manners of issues. Wales only secured a bonus point win with their last attack of the game against Portugal, while France were not even that successful, settling for a nervy 27-12 win over Uruguay. However, not all the favourites struggled as New Zealand and South Africa both racked up over 70 points with weakened sides against Namibia and Romania respectively, both of whom look the worst teams in the competition. 

England took on Japan in the final match of the round, as they looked to carry on the momentum from their opening win over Argentina. The Brave Blossoms started their campaign with a win over Chile, but do not look anywhere near the side that took the world by storm 4 years ago. Neither team looked like they wanted to win in the early stages, England kicking possession away at every opportunity before Japanese sloppiness frequently handed the ball back. It was that sloppiness that gifted England their first try of the tournament, Lewis Ludlam crashing over from short range, before Japan closed the gap to 13-12 after a series of penalties from Rikiya Matsuda. From there however the Japanese train came completely off the rails, and England capitalised with some of their best attacking rugby under Steve Borthwick to run in a further 3 tries for a bonus point win, one bouncing fortunately off the head of Joe Marler for Courtney Lawes to stroll in untouched. England now have one foot in the quarter-finals despite a tricky contest against Samoa still on the schedule, and will fancy their chances against any of Wales, Australia and Fiji.

## United They Fall
The Premier League season is still young, yet Manchester United are already embroiled in a number of controversies. First off was the Mason Greenwood saga, previously covered on the blog, but as soon as that had come to some sort of a conclusion came the revelations about last year’s £82m signing Antony. Recently removed from the Brazil squad following reports that police are investigating allegations domestic violence against his ex-girlfriend, Antony has not returned to United since the reports, but has strongly denied any wrongdoing. Whether or not he is innocent, from a sporting angle this is yet another headache for a club heavily criticised for their handling of such sensitive topics in the past. Less serious but a distraction nonetheless is the disciplinary action taken against Jadon Sancho. Manager Erik Ten Hag cited poor training standards when questioned why he was omitted from their squad to face Arsenal a few weeks ago, only for Sancho to take to social media to effectively call out his manager and deny Ten Hag’s reasonings. Sancho is now training away from the club, meaning £150m worth of signings in the past 3 years are now unavailable to the club.

Even against that backdrop, United still have a very talented squad and were looking to get back on track as they welcomed high-flying Brighton to Old Trafford over the weekend. Their welcome was perhaps too warm, as what followed was a display that would have had Sir Alex Ferguson shaking his head in disgust as they were run ragged by Roberto De Zerbi’s men, falling to a 3-1 defeat to leave them on 6 points after 5 games. Misery loves company, and United fans can take solace in the trials of Chelsea, the West London club failing to show any of the kind of quality one would expect from such an expensive squad as they limped to a 0-0 draw away to Bournemouth. The overriding emotion following the game was annoyance that 2 hours had been wasted watching a wholly forgettable game. Chelsea sit one place below United in 14th, with a measly 5 points.

Elsewhere in the league, Manchester City overcame an early West Ham goal to defeat the much-improved Hammers 3-1 in a tricky tie. City are dealing with a rake of injuries at present and they are not firing on all cylinders, but they still have more than enough quality to see off most sides. Similarly, Liverpool had to go a goal down away to Wolves before scoring 3 second-half goals to secure the full 3 points. Despite their defensive frailties, Liverpool look best place to challenge City at the moment, as they look to return to the form of two seasons ago. Arsenal overcame their Goodison Park hoodoo to keep pace with the leaders, as Leandro Trossard curled home the winner with 20 minutes to play to give Arsenal their first win away to Everton since 2017. Arsenal are off the blistering pace they set at the start of last season, but are still finding a way to keep winning, which is arguably more impressive. Their depth will be tested as Champions League football returns this week, a factor they did not have to deal with last season.

## Positive Sainz
I have not covered Formula 1 too much in the early days of the Uppercut, as Red Bull and Max Verstappen’s incredible domination has left little to write about. Enter the Singapore Grand Prix. On the tight street circuit, Saturday’s qualifying session takes on a greater emphasis than at other tracks as overtakes are at a premium come race time. Therefore, when Verstappen and teammate Sergio Perez could only manage to start 11th & 13th with their car struggling for grip, there were whispers in the Paddock that the record-breaking streaks that Red Bull and Verstappen were on could finally be snapped.

And so it transpired. In what was probably the most entertaining race of the season, pole-sitter Carlos Sainz claimed his and Ferrari’s first win of the season, but it was not all plain-sailing. Multiple safety cars brought Sainz back to the pack any time he looked set to drive off into the distance, while also introducing intriguing tactical decisions, which have been the bane of Ferrari’s existence for some years now. However, even with the top 4 cars separated by about 2 seconds(basically bumper-to-bumper) on the final lap, Sainz held his nerve for a thrilling victory, only the 2nd of the young Spaniard’s career. He was followed home by the British pair of Lando Norris(McLaren) and Lewis Hamilton(Mercedes), the latter benefiting from a last-lap crash by his teammate George Russell to sneak onto the podium. Mercedes had been close to Sainz all race and took a gamble by switching to fresh medium-compound tyres with 20 laps to go after a Virtual Safety Car, hoping to catch and pass the leader on far older tyres, but having closed up to the back of Sainz and Norris, they were made face the harsh realities of the Marina Bay circuit, as there was simply no way past Norris’ excellent defending.

As if to flaunt the dominance of his RB19, Verstappen came home in a very respectable 5th place. He will know that the Driver’s and Constructor’s Championships are already in the bag, and no doubt more records will fall before the season is out. This Singapore Grand Prix will end up as little more than an anomaly of the season, but for 2 hours on Sunday it was nice to once again wonder who might win the race.

Thank you for reading, and as always I would love to hear any thoughts/comments!

*Verstappen’s streak has been broken*  
*But Sainz’s victory is little more than a token*  
*Next up for Ireland is the Boks*  
*Who will Farrell choose as his locks?*  
*Our World Cup campaign has finally awoken*  
