---
layout: post
title:  "The Uppercut - The End of the Road"
---
*You can also listen to an audio version of this article on Souncloud! [Click here to listen!](https://on.soundcloud.com/9RDPybf14LTKgQQEA)*

*You can subscribe to the Uppercut by following @simoonssnaps on Instagram, or emailing @theuppercutblog@gmail.com to receive new post notifications.*

Welcome back to The Uppercut! Apologies for missing last week’s edition as I was on my holidays, which is also why this issue will be talking solely about the rugby, but besides another sobering loss for the Irish football team, there wasn’t really much else to talk about anyway…

*Irish Eyes Are Crying*
Mine were at the very least. I’ll begin by saying I have not rewatched Ireland’s quarter-final loss to New Zealand on Saturday night, and I probably never will, so my thoughts here are those that went through my head during the 80 minutes at the Stade de France, and what I have tried to piece together in the aftermath. Writing about a loss I have felt so emotionally about is a new experience for me, so please excuse me if it seems a bit all over the place, because that is exactly how my head feels when thinking about it!

I think I am speaking for many Irish fans when I say this one hurt perhaps more than any other, because never before have we had such a realistic chance at being crowned World Champions. And in this game, despite never leading, Ireland showed exactly why we were right to believe in them. New Zealand are proven winners, and from the off they punched us in the mouth. A 13-0 hole stunned the crowd but not the team. Their belief in themselves, their refusal to accept defeat, was nothing short of awe-inspiring. Time and again, the 3-time World Champions and most-feared nation in rugby dealt what seemed like the knockout blow, only for the men from the Emerald Isle to regroup and go again. Without disparaging past Irish teams, I truly believe that none other that has competed at a World Cup would have come within 20 points of the All Blacks after that start. That is not to say that this iteration is vastly more talented than past Irish teams, but their mental toughness is like nothing we have seen before. From my perch at the stadium, I truly believed at every stage that they would win it, right up until Wayne Barnes ended the incredible 37-phase final stand by awarding New Zealand a penalty. There is only one team in my lifetime that I have felt that about, and that is Tom Brady’s New England Patriots. Remarkably, those 37 consecutive phases were the most ever at a Rugby World Cup, and they came at the end of one of the most physically and mentally draining games they will ever play. To trust their skills so resolutely and display such accuracy at the breakdown in the face of overwhelming pressure should not be lost with the final score.

In the end, the game really could have gone either way. This was the All Blacks’ best performance of the year, and Ireland were marginally below par (largely due to New Zealand’s unrelenting pressure). I felt that if Ireland had just been able to grab the lead, they would have held on, but the All Blacks showed all their experience in keeping Ireland at arms length and benefitting from some Irish mistakes at key moments, Ronan Kelleher being held up over the line with 8 minutes to play one that particularly stands out. In reality there is no point in delving into the specifics of what could have been, because on another day Ireland and France both win their matches. If this weekend proves anything, it’s that there is nothing to separate the top 4 teams in the world. Ireland beat South Africa, who beat France, who beat New Zealand, who beat Ireland, all in the space of 5 weeks. The only difference is that the Southern Hemisphere teams did it in the knockout stages, something we will no doubt hear about for the next 4 years. The same with Ireland’s quarter-final curse, which only grows worse with each passing tournament, regardless of how well they played in this one. It is important to remember that rugby is not a sport that only occurs every 4 years, and that this team have given us some truly historic days to celebrate: a series win on New Zealand soil, a Grand Slam sealed on home soil(still only our 4th ever), 17 wins on the bounce. There is a reason why so many supporters travelled to France, and why the nation was so captivated back home. Ireland, defeat or no defeat, are at the forefront of rugby innovation, and are a joy to watch in full flow. There will be more tough days ahead, and bouncing back from this devastation will be no easy feat for the players. Throw in the fact that many of Ireland’s biggest stars of the last 10 years will not be around for Australia 2027, and there is uncertainty as to whether this was a huge chance missed, or yet another stepping stone on the way to the promised land. I hope it is the latter, and given Ireland’s fantastic structures at the grassroots levels, there is no reason to not be optimistic once the disappointment clears.

A final word for Johnny Sexton, whose stellar career came to end on Saturday. No one will be more frustrated at the circumstances in which he bows out than him, but there is no doubting the enormous impact he has had on Irish and Leinster rugby over the past 15 years. His relentless drive in pursuit of excellence has pushed those around him to new heights, and the void he leaves will not be easily filled. In a career filled with highlights, a few stand above the rest: his Heineken Cup final performances in 2009 & 2011 under enormous pressure; the 2018 drop goal to snatch victory at the Stade de France and set Ireland on their way to the Grand Slam; coming into the starting XV to turn around the 2017 British and Irish Lions tour in New Zealand. Regularly counted out at various points throughout his career, he became only the 2nd Irishman to be crowned World Player of the Year in 2018, at the age of 33. He belongs in the discussion of the best out-halves to play the game, and comfortably takes his place amongst the greatest players in Irish history, alongside the likes of Brian O’Driscoll, Paul O’Connell and Keith Wood. He has said he wants to try his hand in the business world next, but knowing his competitive streak, I would not be surprised to see him on a coaching ticket in the not-too-distant future. Thanks for the memories.

The Stade de France was the setting for another titanic clash the following evening, as hosts France took on the reigning World Champions South Africa. Widely considered the two most physical teams in the tournament, the tension was palpable with most feeling it could go either way. The build up to the game was dominated by the health of French captain and superstar Antoine Dupont, who had suffered a fractured cheekbone just 3 weeks earlier against Namibia. His inclusion in the starting XV came as a huge relief to the host nation, who were hoping that this would finally be their year. The Springboks, on the other hand, had a relatively quiet run-in to the game, having had their break week on the final weekend of pool games, thus giving them 2 weeks off. Perhaps that break had introduced some rust as France began with a bang, quickly setting up camp on the opposition 5-metre line, prop Cyril Baille opening the scoring with a well-worked try. South Africa regathered themselves and started to impose their game on France, raining down competitive kicks to test the French aerially. A mistake led to a bouncing ball, and suddenly the electric Kurt-Lee Arendse was running free to tie the game to the home crowd’s dismay. More South African bombs were launched and soon it was former Munster-man Damian de Allende getting on the scoresheet, first breaking down to the French 5-metre line before popping up 2 phases later to crash over. Back came France through the all-action Peato Mauvaka, Dupont brilliantly quick-tapping a penalty to send the hooker over in the corner. Crucially, the usually-automatic Thomas Ramos had his conversion charged down by Cheslin Kolbe after taking too long in the run-up. Would the missed 2 points be costly? Despite France having the better of the exchanges, South Africa struck again as Jesse Kriel’s grubber kick sat up perfectly for Kolbe to score a fantastic try in the corner, converted by Manie Libbok to give the Boks a 7-point buffer. Given the scintillating, back-and-forth nature of the game to this point, it was no surprise when Baille got over for his 2nd try just minutes later to draw the hosts level again, with Ramos nailing the extra points this time. A penalty in the dying minutes of the first half, as Eben Etzebeth was sin-binned for a high tackle, saw France go into the break 3 points ahead after one of the highest-quality halves of rugby you will ever see.

What the second half lacked in spectacular moments, it more than made up for with the tension it delivered. France probed and prodded the South African defence, looking for a try that would take them 2 scores ahead. They settled for a penalty and a 6 point lead with 20 minutes to play, a precarious margin against a Springboks team primed for a big final quarter. 5 behemoths were sprung from the bench, along with World Cup-winning halfbacks Faf de Klerk and Handre Pollard. On 67 minutes, Etzebeth, having benefitted from his enforced break, picked out the overmatched Mathieu Jalibert in defence and crashed over, Pollard converting for a 1-point lead. The game seemed to be slipping away from France as the Boks began to dominate the breakdown, the space that was there in the first half having been shut down. Dupont was not himself, perhaps fearful of a massive collision doing damage to his recently-mended face. Pollard and Ramos traded penalties as France went in search of the winning moment, no doubt feeling the weight of expectation from a crowd and nation who had gone silent such was the nerves. A huge break from Damien Penaud got France into drop-goal range, but their composure deserted them, and the Springboks emerged victorious from a game for the ages.

They will face an England side who, thanks to the lopsided draw, are somehow the only Northern Hemisphere nation to qualify for the semi-finals. They looked much-improved in the first-half as they raced out to a 15-3 lead, centres Manu Tuilagi and Joe Marchant both crossing after sustained periods of pressure before Fijian winger Vinaya Habosi was sin-binned for a head-to-head collision with England out-half-turned-full-back Marcus Smith. The Pacific Islanders managed to compose themselves and rediscover the form that saw them beat Australia and push Wales all the way to cross just before half-time to leave the scores at 21-10. The second-half was tight, and with 15 minutes to play England led 24-10 and were well on their way. However, against a tiring defence, the Fijians sparked into life, scoring two tries that only they could, creating breaks from nothing. Suddenly the score was 24-24, and the prospect of a huge upset was alive again. However, England’s composure under pressure came up trumps as Farrell first kicked a drop goal then a penalty to give England breathing room. A final, desperate Fiji attack was repelled, and despite being written off, England will be the only team flying the 6 Nations flag this weekend. 

South Africa will enter that clash as enormous favourites, and it is hard to see any way England can snatch victory against the team that thwarted them in the final 4 years ago. The victor will face New Zealand or Argentina, after the latter recovered from a shaky start against Wales to prevail. The men in red took advantage of a sluggish Argentinian start to shoot out to a 10-0 lead thanks to a converted try and penalty from out-half Dan Biggar. Los Pumas grew into the game but were consistently denied by dogged Welsh defence, who themselves missed some chances to push the game out of sight. The South Americans ended the first-half stronger, but trailed 10-6 at the break. With Wales leading 17-12 in the second-half, Argentina were lucky to avoid a major sanction when lock Guido Petti’s shoulder sent Wales’ Nick Tompkins off for a HIA, and and they made the most of their luck with prop Joel Sclavi burrowing over from close-range. Wales were forced to chase the game, and centurion Nicolas Sanchez snagged an interception and took it the distance to end an enthralling encounter.

So the semi-finals are set, and there’s no denying the feeling that the best of the tournament is behind us. New Zealand and South Africa go into their semi-finals as overwhelming favourites, while Argentina and England have shown little to suggest they could pull off an upset. While Ireland are devastated, it is probably a bigger loss for France, whose fans truly believed their time had come. The competition is worse off for having lost both sets of fans(although the French will no doubt still show up to belt out ‘La Marseillaise’), but the teams that have delivered are still in the running. Here’s hoping they end the tournament with a bang.

As a fan, the experience of being in Paris was incredible. In every café, bar and boulangerie an Irish jersey could be spotted, and the locals completely bought in. For a city with a thousand different things going on, the Rugby World Cup was everywhere you looked. The atmosphere at the games was unmatched, as fans arrived early to soak it in and make their predictions, no one wanting to miss so much as one word of the anthems. To be able to enjoy it, the Scotland match especially, with friends and family was a memory I shall cherish despite how it all turned out. In the week between, myself and my girlfriend took a train down to the lovely city of Nice, where even still the rugby could not be escaped even though the games had largely finished up in the South of France. By the end of the week, we were thankful to be caught up in the insanity of Disneyland, which provided a welcome respite from the growing nerves. Perhaps, for both the physical and mental health, it is better it didn’t continue for another 2 weeks(just kidding).

It will be normal service resumed next week as I will be able to tune into the various sports on this weekend, which includes the semi-finals, the Cricket World Cup, and a huge Premier League battle between London’s two biggest clubs. Thanks for reading!

*They ran, offloaded and delighted the crowd*  
*The likes of which has never been so loud*  
*Ireland’s odyssey is over*  
*But we’re still singing The Wild Rover*  
*Because by God, did they make a nation proud*  
