---
layout: post
title:  "The Uppercut - Rugby World Cup and NFL Back With a Bang"
---

*You can also listen to an audio version of this article on Souncloud! [Click here to listen!](https://on.soundcloud.com/8W539fRMrHAxfAUH7)*

*You can subscribe to the Uppercut by following @simoonssnaps on Instagram, or emailing @theuppercutblog@gmail.com to receive new post notifications.*

Welcome back to this week’s edition of the Uppercut! Following last week’s Rugby World Cup preview, the tournament is officially underway following a cracking weekend of fixtures. I’ll look back on what can be gleaned from those matches and what they mean going forward, before reviewing the opening week of America’s Game as the NFL returns to our screens from across the pond. Added to that, you’ll find all you need to know about the U.S. Open from Flushing Meadows, the World Rowing Championships in Belgrade, and another disappointing international window for the Irish men’s football team. Enjoy!

## Sweat Victory
Despite searing temperatures and delays for fans accessing the venues, the 2023 Rugby World Cup in France finally kicked off on Friday night. After first World Rugby chairman Bill Beaumont and then French President Emmanuel Macron were booed during the Opening Ceremony, the hosts took on 3-time winners New Zealand in a highly-anticipated clash. Perhaps feeling the pressure of a home World Cup, France started slowly and New Zealand looked the more dangerous, scoring early through Mark Telea to temporarily stun the home crowd. However, the mighty French pack soon began to dominate their visiting counterparts, and took a 9-8 lead into halftime thanks to the boot of Thomas Ramos. Early in the second half, France appeared to switch off when a New Zealand pass looked to have drifted forward, and Mark Telea scampered into the corner to restore the All Blacks lead. However, this would be as good as it got for them, as they rarely threatened the French line thereafter, the hosts’ dominance up front seeing them retake the momentum and the lead when Damien Penaud crossed to put France up by 3. Further pressure yielded more penalties, and in the final minutes, substitute Melvyn Jaminet claimed a bouncing ball to add a sheen to the scoreline, the French up-and-running with a slightly flattering 29-13 win. For France, relief at having passed the first test, and they way they overcame their nerves will no doubt stand to them going forward. For New Zealand, many of the pre-tournament doubts about this team were proven correct, and right now they do not look like contenders. They will not face another true test until the quarter-finals, so it will be vital for them to find some rhythm if they want to make noise at this tournament.

On day 2, all eyes turned to Marseille as England took on Argentina with the winner likely to top Pool D when all is said and done. Argentina came in as narrow favourites following solid performances in the Rugby Championship and some rather dismal ones from the English in their pre-tournament warm-ups. When Tom Curry was red-carded early-on for a high hit(perhaps a little harshly in my opinion, but I see the reasoning), English fans would have been filled with an ominous sense of déja vu, but George Ford steadied the ship with a hat-trick of drop goals showing you don’t need to be able to attack to score points. There were moments when Argentina could have fought back, but in truth this was an awful performance by their standards and there will be question marks over their lead-in, having played their last meaningful match over a month ago(discounting a friendly against Spain). England coach Steve Borthwick should be allowed take a mini victory lap given some of the discourse around his team, as they proved they are no push-over when it comes to tournament rugby. Their defence was ferocious, and with Ford pulling the strings they look a far more solid outfit than predicted.

The final match of round 1 was easily the best of the weekend, as Wales came up against the Flying Fijians. The Pacific Islanders lit up the first half with some scintillating tries, before seeming to lose their way as Wales roared into a 32-14 lead, securing the 4-try bonus point. However, Fiji refused to go down without a fight, recovering to 32-26 before launching a last-gasp attack which got them deep into the Welsh 22. Unfortunately, with an open lane to the try-line, centre Semi Radradra fumbled a bouncing ball to end a game for the ages, as Wales fans around the world breathed a huge sigh of relief. Disappointment for Fiji, but all is not lost as they looked very impressive in parts and caused Wales all sorts of issues. They will face a make-or-break match against Australia next weekend to determine whether it will be a 4th straight exit at the pool stages of the World Cup.

The previous day in Bordeaux, world number 1 side Ireland got their tournament underway with a 82-7 destruction of minnows Romania. Despite an early try for the underdogs and the reoccurrence of some familiar lineout issues, this was about as good a start as Ireland could have asked for, with no notable injuries and some crisp link-up play that had been missing from their warm-ups as they ran in 12 tries and played right to final whistle. Perhaps most importantly, captain Johnny Sexton put in a big shift to knock off the rust, having not played since Ireland’s Grand Slam decider in March. With 2 tries and 7 conversions, the Ireland playmaker was involved in everything, and surpassed Ronan O’Gara as Ireland’s all-time scorer at World Cups. Job number one completed for Andy Farrell’s men as thoughts turn to a sterner test next week against Tonga. I’d expect some squad rotation, but Farrell will be keen to keep up the momentum before a titanic clash against the Springboks in 2 weeks’ time.

Rounding up the rest of the results, the aforementioned Springboks laid out their title credentials without really getting out of 4th-gear as they suffocated the high-flying Scots in Marseille. Scotland’s much-vaunted attack had no answers for South Africa’s ferocious defence as they failed to really fire a shot, and two tries early in the second half from Pieter-Steph Du Toit and Kurt-Lee Arendse(if you haven’t seen the no-look cross field-kick for this try, do yourself a favour and check it out) felt like the nails in the coffin. Earlier in the day, Japan saw off a spirited performance from debutants Chile, much like Italy against Namibia the day before as both teams had to fight hard for their bonus points. Australia recorded their first victory of Eddie Jones’ second tenure as head coach as they dispatched Georgia by a score of 35-15. Showing better cohesion and physicality than in their earlier outings under Jones, the Wallabies blew away their European opponents with 2 early tries, before adding 2 more in the second-half to secure the bonus point win. We’ll know more about this team this time next week, after they have taken on the wounded Fijians.

## Kansas City Grief
The 32 teams of the National Football League returned for the 2023 season this weekend as America’s Game resumes its domination of Sunday evenings(for some). The pre-season favourites got off to mixed starts, beginning with the reigning champion Chiefs on Thursday. With all-world quarterback Patrick Mahomes at the helm, few expected anything other than a routine victory for the team raising their 3rd Super Bowl banner. But the Detroit Lions had other ideas, converting enough of their chances and capitalising on a woeful night for the Chiefs’ pass-catchers to run out 21-20 victors. The Lions have suffered with unwatchable teams for the vast majority of their history, but they have been reinvented under head coach Dan Campbell. Campbell, who often can come across as the stereotypical American ‘meathead’, is developing an incredible culture in Detroit that has them as one of the grittiest teams in the league, and this victory will give them a lot of belief that they can challenge for the NFC North division and possibly win a first playoff game in 32 years. For the Chiefs, this loss will likely not derail their year and I expect them to once again be contenders at the business end of the season, but their depth at wide receiver, flagged as a weakness before the game, could prove an Achilles heel.

The Chiefs’ Super Bowl opponents, the Philadelphia Eagles, had just enough in the tank to spoil Tom Brady’s return to Foxborough, the home of the New England Patriots. The Eagles raced out to a 16-0 lead but were then stifled by the Patriots’ swarming defence, as quarterback Jalen Hurts struggled to produce the same form that saw the Eagles have the top-ranked offence last year. His Patriots counterpart, Mac Jones, facing a prove-it season in his 3rd year in the league, recovered from a slow start to throw 3 touchdowns and give his team a chance to snatch a statement win, but in the end it was their poor execution that allowed the Eagles to sneak away with a 25-20 win.

The two teams who lost in last years’ Conference finals(i.e. the semi-finals), the San Francisco 49ers and Cincinnati Bengals, also had varying outcomes. The 49ers, who lost both quarterbacks in that Conference defeat to the Eagles to render their challenge moot, blew out the Pittsburgh Steelers 30-7 away from home to remind everyone that they are a force to be reckoned with this year. Their quarterback, Brock Purdy, was the last player to be drafted in 2022, earning him the title of ‘Mr. Irrelevant’. He has been anything but since he took over the starting job last year, and has looked far more at home in head coach Kyle Shanahan’s offensive system than 2021 3rd-overall pick Trey Lance ever did, leading them to trade Lance to the Cowboys this offseason. Purdy’s performance outlines how much of a gamble the draft is, and having now claimed the position of undisputed QB of the 49ers, it is exciting to see how he goes this season. The Bengals have their own star quarterback in 2020 1st-overall pick Joe Burrow, but ‘Joey Ice’ was unable to get his team in gear in Week 1, as they fell to a 24-3 defeat to division rivals the Cleveland Browns. Having started last season slowly as well, there will be no panic in Cincinnati, as they are still stocked with talent at the skill positions. Lastly on this game, I along with most often find myself rooting for the underdog. But in Cleveland’s case, there is nothing to support, as they continue to employ a quarterback by the name of Deshaun Watson, accused by 22 different women of sexual misconduct. It is important to note that Watson was not criminally charged and served a laughable 11-game suspension last year, but he has never shown a hint of remorse and his presence has turned many Browns fans off their team. Cleveland are also not an innocent party here, trading for him from his former team the Houston Texans, before giving him a $230m contract fully guaranteed, all after the allegations had been made public.

The best game of the weekend came between two offensive juggernauts in the Miami Dolphins and Los Angeles Chargers. Their respective quarterbacks, Tua Tagavailoa and Justin Herbert, were taken with the 5th and 6th picks of the 2020 draft and as such will be compared to each other for their entire careers. On this occasion, it was Tua who got the better of Herbert in this back-and-forth affair as both teams looked like they could score from anywhere. A 200+ yard, 2 touchdown performance from receiver Tyreek Hill was the standout effort as Miami took the lead with less than 2 minutes remaining and held on to get their season off to a perfect start. With both teams playing highly competitive divisions, every win is vital even at this early stage, and Miami’s offensive form will be a boost to Dolphins fans who saw their high-flying offence stagnate down the stretch of last season, but it remains to be seen whether head coach and offensive mastermind Mike McDaniels can avoid the same fate this year.

Elsewhere, the Cowboys’ defence suffocated the New York Giants in Primetime, running out 40-0 to embarrass their division rivals in their own stadium. 3rd-year linebacker Micah Parsons looks like a generational talent, and will be in the running for Defensive Player of the Year for many seasons to come barring injuries. The Baltimore Ravens and Jacksonville Jaguars, both playoff teams in the AFC last season, looked rusty in their season debuts but pulled out wins over the lowly Houston Texans and Indianapolis Colts, while there were upsets for the Tampa Bay Buccaneers and Los Angeles Rams, who turned over the Minnesota Vikings and Seattle Seahawks respectively. The Buccaneers are playing their first season without Tom Brady since he won them their 2nd-ever(his 7th) Super Bowl in 2020, and have chosen the much-maligned Baker Mayfield as his successor(for now). Mayfield was solid in his Buccaneers debut following unsuccessful stints with the Browns and Rams.

## Gauff the Charts
The final Grand Slam of the tennis season wrapped up in New York this weekend, with the home crowd left basking in the glow of the first American to win the tournament, men’s or women’s, since Sloane Stephens in 2017. Coco Gauff defeated Belarusian Aryna Sabalenka, semi-finalist at Wimbledon and now the world no.1, and in doing so emulated Tracy Austin and Serena Williams in achieving the feat before her 20th birthday. She was made to work hard for her victory, as Sabalenka’s punishing groundstrokes saw her take the first set 6-2, before Gauff recovered, with the backing a a raucous support at Arthur Ashe Stadium, to claim the next two sets for a 2-6, 6-3, 6-2 win that seemed rather easy by the end. 

Since she broke onto the scene in 2019, reaching the 4th round of Wimbledon at the age of just 15, Gauff has struggled to convert her early success into tour wins, with a French Open final appearance by far her best showing at a Grand Slam coming into this year. However, the signs were evident that she had taken her game to higher levels in recent months, and wins at the Washington Open and, more notably, the Cincinnati Masters just weeks before the tournament reinforced that opinion. Gauff had some tough matches on the way to the final, but the incredible rate at which high-seeded players were eliminated in the early stages no doubt benefited her as she only faced one top-10-seeded player before taking on the second-seeded Sabalenka. She will now have a target on her back, and will have to keep improving with the competition. Since the waning of Serena Williams’ powers, women’s tennis has been brilliantly unpredictable, with no Grand Slam-winners able to emerge as a truly dominant force. Time will tell whether Gauff has the ability to buck that trend.

On the men’s side of the draw, upsets were also in fashion, as seeds tumbled in the early round. However, as has often been the case in men’s tennis this century, the eventual winner was only ever going to one of 3 men, this time made up of Carlos Alcaraz, Daniil Medvedev and Novak Djokovic. All 3 progressed to the semi-finals with ease, at which point Medvedev ended hopes of a rematch of the Wimbledon final by avenging his defeat to Alcaraz at the same round at the All-England Tennis Club, setting up a face-off between the 2021 champion in Medvedev and the 3-time U.S. Open winner in Djokovic, who shrugged off the challenge of home-favourite Ben Shelton to give himself a chance at a 4th title in New York.

The final was a high-quality affair, both players content to engage in long rallies in a war of attrition that saw the second set last a whopping 104 minutes. Having lost the opening set 3-6, Medvedev had an opportunity to draw level in the second set tiebreak, but couldn’t seize the moment. Having given his all in two close sets only to find himself 2-0 down to the tennis equivalent of the Terminator, the result wasn’t in doubt after that, but the 6-3, 7-6(5), 6-3 final score doesn’t do justice to how close the match truly was.

Djokovic continues to show no signs of letting up at the age of 36, reaching all 4 Grand Slam finals and winning 3 of them, which has seen him take and extend the record for most Grand Slam wins for a male player. His game is phenomenal as he flies around the court hitting inch-perfect shots, but it is his mental strength and fortitude that truly define him as one of the all-time greats. Time and time again, challengers have come, throwing all they have at him, and bar a handful of opponents almost all have come away empty-handed. Such is his determination that everyone and their mothers know that he is never out regardless of the scoreboard, and any period that he is off his game is fleeting. However, the challenges will not stop, and there is a young Spaniard who has the quality to go toe-to-toe with Djokovic. Alcaraz admitted he was not mature enough to win his semi-final against Medvedev(a show of maturity in and of itself), and no doubt he will be even stronger next year. If this year is anything to go by, their clashes next year will be epic. Not everyone is a Djokovic fan, and for very understandable reasons, but enjoy him as a sportsman while he is still around because it is truly special to watch.

## Overtime
### All She Rowed
Ireland lived up to their excellent rowing pedigree once again at the World Rowing Championships in Belgrade, with Olympic champions Paul O’Donovan and Fintan McCarthy once again outlining they will be tough to beat in France next year with a 3rd world title for the pairing. They were trailing the Swiss boat for large parts of the race, but in trademark style cranked up the power when it was most needed to take the gold. Even more impressive was the performance of Siobhán McCrohan in the women’s lightweight single sculls, winning her first ever rowing championship medal at the age of 36, having quit a job in aeronautical engineering just last October after a hiatus from the sport. In sweltering heat, McCrohan showed age is just a number as she took the lead with 300m to go, never letting up to eventually finish the clear winner. In all, Ireland took home a further two bronzes and 6 boats qualified for next year’s Olympics. Not bad going at all.

### A Penny for Kenny’s Thoughts
Stephen Kenny’s grip on the title of Ireland manager is rapidly slipping, as Ireland ended another dismal international window with defeats away to France and at home to the Netherlands. Having lost more-winnable games earlier in the campaign, Ireland knew that 3 points minimum were required to remain in contention for qualification for next year’s European Championships, but that extra sense of urgency never materialised on the pitch as Ireland were outplayed for most of the 180 minutes. Having failed to turn potential into results, it looks like Kenny’s time is up, but no one will be thrilled to see him leave. Kenny has brought through a new crop of exciting young players(the injury to Evan Ferguson before this window was a crunching blow) and instilled a more attacking gameplan than his predecessors. However, the big result that was needed to affirm the decisions he has made never came, and it is yet another major tournament that Ireland will miss.

### Donald’s Ducks
European Ryder Cup captain Luke Donald has included Major winners Shane Lowry and Justin Rose among his captain’s picks for this months’s contest against the US, with the Irishman’s passion for the tournament and past results enough to see Luke Donald look past his recent form. He rewarded his captain’s faith with a strong showing at the Irish Open this weekend, and will be desperate to help Europe win following their record defeat in his only Cup appearance 2 years ago. The biggest surprise was the inclusion of 23-year old Swede Ludwig Åberg, who only turned professional just months ago. A rapidly-rising star, Åberg’s first career win at the European Masters was sufficient to convince Donald of his potential, and he will now face-off against the top players in the world on one of golf’s biggest stage. The Americans, for their part, will field an incredibly talented team, their captain’s picks headlined by stars Brooks Koepka and Jordan Spieth. The captains’ 6 picks each will now join the 6 from each team who qualified automatically to form the 12-man teams.

That’s all for this week, thank you so much for reading. As always, any thoughts or comments are always welcome!

*Ireland are up and running*  
*But it’s the French for whom other teams are gunning*  
*Gauff is victorious in New York*  
*In Belgrade, the same for the boys from Cork*  
*I hope you don’t mind my punning :)*  
