---
layout: post
title:  "The Uppercut - Hats Off to the Europeans"
---
*You can also listen to an audio version of this article on Souncloud! [Click here to listen!](https://on.soundcloud.com/PkojBna5rWuM2RL6A)*

*You can subscribe to the Uppercut by following @simoonssnaps on Instagram, or emailing @theuppercutblog@gmail.com to receive new post notifications.*

Welcome to this week's edition of the Uppercut covering the sporting action from the past weekend. It was the worst weekend of the Rugby World Cup in terms of important matchups, but that void was ably filled by the return of the Ryder Cup to European shores, as Team Europe took on the best of the USA in one of golf's flagship events. Pair that with the 'significant human error' and 'systemic weaknesses' witnessed in the Premier League on Saturday, and there is more than enough to mull over. Let's get into it!

## Blue Sunday
At points during Sunday’s Singles session, the USA threatened to pull off the mother of all comebacks. Facing a 5-point deficit, and with Europe needing just 4 points from the 12 matches to regain the Ryder Cup, the Americans knew that each shot was vital, and any slip-ups would be greeted by a mighty roar from the heavily partisan crowd. Few expected anything but a routine romp to victory for the men in blue, who had played some sumptuous golf over the previous two days to take a near-record lead into the singles. They made a dream start, winning the first hole in several of the opening matches to spark hopes of emulating, or even beating, the US’ Cup-record score of 19-9, set 2 years ago at Whistling Straits when Covid restrictions meant non-US-based European fans could not even attend the event.

Non-playing captain Luke Donald had stacked the top of his order in the hopes of securing the victory early, with Jon Rahm, Viktor Hovland and Rory McIlroy off in the first 4 games, along with veteran Justin Rose. The strategy worked for the most part, Hovland and McIlroy delivering their points in relatively straightforward matches against Collin Morikawa and Sam Burns respectively. Rose lost his match to an inspired Patrick Cantlay(more on him later), and Rahm managed a half against World #1 Scottie Scheffler in a match of extreme quality, to leave Europe 1.5 points short of victory. Tyrell Hatton, another European who played sublime golf over the 3 days, took out the British Open champion Brian Harman to bring Donald’s men to the brink, but the rest of the order was suddenly looking a little shaky. Rookies Ludvig Åberg, Sepp Straka and Nicolai Hojgaard had all played their parts in the first 2 days, but struggled on their own as US veterans Brooks Koepka, Justin Thomas and Xander Schauffele brought the Americans within touching distance. Matt Fitzpatrick missed a putt to win the Ryder Cup on the 18th hole against Max Homa, and suddenly Europe were 3 lost holes away from a historic choke.

That is, until Rickie Fowler put his 16th tee shot into the water, while his opponent Tommy Fleetwood hit one of the shots of the weekend to leave himself 25 feet for an eagle. Fleetwood missed the eagle putt, but Fowler conceded the short birdie putt to leave Fleetwood 2-up with 2 holes to play, guaranteeing the half-point Europe so desperately needed. Fans and players celebrated even as the match continued to the 17th, where Shane Lowry had just holed a long putt to also guarantee he could not lose. The final matches finished up amidst jovial scenes, and when the dust had settled Europe had a deserved 16.5-11.5 victory. Donald’s picks had been thoroughly vindicated as every member of the team counted on the scoreboard, and Lowry was the emotional heart of the team despite not delivering his best golf. For USA captain Zach Johnson, some introspection may be required as some of his decisions did not pay dividends.

The US team have invested more in team bonding in recent years, looking to find the sort of camaraderie and cohesion that powered the European dominance since the start of the century. However, they opted to play no golf between the end of the FedEx Cup(late August) and now, opening up the potential for them to be a tad rusty. That was certainly how it looked as Europe came sprinting out of the blocks on Friday morning, playing in their preferred format of Foursomes. Viktor Hovland and Jon Rahm both chipped in, creating the first of what would turn out to be many roars as Europe took a clean sweep of the session for the first time in the tournament’s history. None of the matches even went down the 18th, while rookies Ludvig Åberg and Sepp Straka looked right at home in the company of Hovland and Shane Lowry.

That afternoon’s Fourballs session was less of a walkover, as the inevitable response from the Americans arrived. Matthew Fitzpatrick in the final match rendered his playing partner Rory McIlroy an amused observer as he blazed a trail through the first few holes, desperate to claim his first Ryder Cup points after failing to register any in two losing efforts stateside in 2016 and 2021. They secured their point early, but at times it looked like the US may fight back to take the session 3-1 with the top 3 matches looking like going their way. However, looking back, the final 45 minutes of the session may have been the proverbial nail in the US’ coffin. All three matches came down 18, where first Hovland, then Rahm, and finally Rose all holed huge, clutch putts to halve their matches. Having won the first session 4-0, the Fourballs also went to Europe 2.5-1.5, and for the first time ever the Americans had failed to win a single match in a day.

Saturday dawned with Europe leading by 5 points, and a fresh controversy was brewing. A report in the morning suggested a rift within the US team led by Patrick Cantlay, who was reported to be unhappy that the competing players are not payed for their efforts. Suggestions that he was not wearing a Team USA cap in protest led the European fans to wave their own caps at him as he went round the course during the Foursomes and Fourballs sessions. Although he was mum on his thoughts about payment, Cantlay professed he had no idea why fans were waving caps at him until he was informed about the story, and dismissed any notions of a ‘protest’. Things reached boiling point when Cantlay holed a huge putt on the 18th green, cuing wild celebrations from his caddie Joe LaCava, who waved his own cap around even while Rory McIlroy was lining up a putt to halve the match. Despite being asked to stop, LaCava persisted, and when McIlroy missed his putt, several members of the European team confronted LaCava on the green in an ugly end to the day’s play. The feud didn’t end there, as McIlroy was seen later in the car park being held back from confronting the US team again by teammate Shane Lowry. Time will tell whether there was truly any rift in the team, but it provided some much-needed intrigue heading into the Singles.

If the report fired up the Americans, it wasn’t obvious in Saturday’s morning Foursomes session. Europe continued their dominance, winning 3 of the 4 matches with the same pairings as the day before. Only Sepp Straka and Shane Lowry failed to repeat their previous day’s result, but the story of the morning was Hovland and Åberg’s domination of Scheffler and Brooks Koepka. The multi-major winners were putrid, and the match finished on the 11th green as the Europeans ran out 9&7 winners, the largest ever margin of victory in a Ryder Cup match. Now trailing by 7, the US finally warmed to their task, and in their preferred format of Fourballs they broke out of the blue fog that had surrounded them for 36 hours to leave a more respectable scoreline. Sam Burns and Collin Morikawa defeated the Hovland-Åberg combination, before Brian Harman and Max Homa(Team USA’s top scorer of the weekend with 3) added another point. Rose and Bob MacIntyre pulled one back for Europe before the previously-mentioned scenes on the 18th in the final game.

As seen, the fightback was too little, too late for the Americans, and they’ll have to take a hard look at themselves before the event moves to Bethpage Black in New York in 2 years’ time. Rustiness was certainly a factor, and Luke Donald’s picks far outplayed those of Zach Johnson. Perhaps the LIV Golf situation was more detrimental to the US team than the Europeans, but those involved with the Saudi-backed tour were available for selection for the Americans, and Johnson opted against selecting them. The course set-up was excellent for the Europeans, and they were far more adept at avoiding the nightmarish rough lining the fairways than their big-hitting counterparts. Can they become the first team, European or American, to win an away Ryder Cup since the Miracle of Medinah in Wisconsin in 2012? They will certainly put up a huge fight, and Donald’s stellar captaincy has him in line to lead them again in 2025. For now, the Cup is back where it belongs.

## VAR-cical Scenes
Ange Postecoglou’s Spurs defeated title-hopefuls Liverpool in an entertaining game on Saturday evening in the Premier League, but Joel Matip’s 95th-minute own goal to hand Spurs a 2-1win was lost in the aftermath of yet another VAR controversy. In the first half, Luis Diaz ran on to a Mo Salah pass to burst clear of the Spurs defensive line and coolly slot the ball past keeper Vicario. Diaz and his teammates’ celebrations were halted at the sight of a raised flag from the nearest linesman, signalling that Diaz had been offside when Salah played the pass, and the goal should not stand. As is customary now for tight decisions, VAR(video assistant referee) was asked to confirm the decision with the help of replays, having already been involved in the earlier sending-off of Liverpool midfielder Curtis Jones. Despite the replay angles clearly showing Diaz onside, VAR confirmed the on-field decision and Spurs restarted the game with a free-kick. Minutes later, Heung-Min Son put Spurs ahead, before Cody Gakpo equalised just before half-time.

Following Matip’s own goal and their defeat, Liverpool fans were rightly outraged and the PGMOL, England’s governing body for referees, announced an investigation into how the onside goal had been ruled out, given VAR was introduced to correct these exact errors. Audio of the match referees’ communications during the incident revealed the full extent of the error: VAR had thought the goal was initially ruled *onside*, meaning that when they had come to their conclusion, they chose to confirm the on-field decision, which farcically could not then be overturned once the error was realised. The lapse in concentration could be huge come the business-end of the title race, and the erring referees have been stood down from duty for the foreseeable future. Many have been critical of VAR since its introduction in 2019, and it has introduced an anxious wait after goals to see if they will stand, which can rob the game of some of its spark. However, we don’t talk about the decisions it gets right, which are far greater in number than the errors. The issue with VAR is that, having access to all the camera angles, it is expected to get decisions right 100% of the time, which is simply not feasible in such a nuanced sport, especially when it comes to handballs. There is certainly a poor standard of training for the referees, and human error should not come into a decision that has gone to VAR. With any luck, incidents like this will spur improvements to ensure we can continue talking about the match, and not those officiating it.

## Tartan Test
Scotland, as predicted, annihilated Romania 84-0 in the penultimate round of pool matches at the Rugby World Cup to set up a mouthwatering clash with world #1 Ireland to determine who will proceed to the knockout stages. There are numerous permutations(I won’t go into them, but this tweet sums it up nicely) about how it could all transpire, but from an Ireland perspective there should be nothing on the mind besides securing a 17th-straight test victory over their 6 Nations rivals. They will come in as heavy favourites, having beaten Scotland in their last 8 encounters, but no one is taking this Scotland team for granted. They are ranked 5th in the world for a reason, and boast one of the most exciting attacks in world rugby. With Finn Russell at out-half, they can create something from nothing, and their depth is as good as I can remember. The fact that these two teams know each so well from countless club and international contests adds some spice too, as there is no love lost between the two sets of fans.

I fully expect Andy Farrell to mostly back the 23 players who got the job done against South Africa to do it again, perhaps with Dan Sheehan and/or Jack Conan coming into the picture. Conan is fit again after suffering an ankle issue in the warm-up match against Italy, and has expressed his relief that he did not have to return home from the tournament following several set-backs. The British and Irish Lions’ starting no.8 2 years ago in South Africa, the return of Conan is a huge boost to a squad that has miraculously avoided major injuries so far(touch wood), and will be a force in the starting XV or when being sprung from the bench. I expect the physicality of Ireland’s defence to stifle Scotland’s attack enough to pull out a tight win, and they will have taken learnings from what South Africa did to Finn Russell in their 18-3 victory over the Scots in Week 1. In my view, Ireland are not winning the World Cup if they can’t beat Scotland, regardless of whether they still progress or not, and that sense of urgency will sharpen Ireland’s skills. I’ll be travelling to the game myself, so here’s hoping for another cracking match on Saturday night.

Rounding up the results, New Zealand had little more than a training run against a horrendous Italian performance which saw them play well below the level they have shown over the last 18 months. The All Blacks can now largely relax until their quarter-final, with their opponent to be decided by the Ireland-Scotland match, while Italy have a last chance at redemption when they face France on Friday night. South Africa eased to a win over Tonga, who finally showed the type of play that was expected from them pre-tournament. Despite the 49-18 defeat, they tested the Springboks vaunted defence and landed some heavy hits of their own. The result means the Springboks are all but confirmed as quarter-finalists, and they will have a week off to plot the next stage of their title defence. Finally, a word for Fiji’s Josua Tuisova, who learned of his 7-year old son’s passing just before their must-win clash against Georgia. He showed enormous strength to play through what I can only imagine is a most awful heartbreak, and he and his teammates were able to dig themselves out of an early hole to win despite being well below their best. A point against Portugal next week is all that is required for qualification, but Portugal showed against Australia that they have the ability to rattle the top teams, and Fiji will have to be on high alert.

