---
layout: post
title:  "The Uppercut-Ireland Make Their ?Debut on the World Stage"
---

Hi folks, welcome back to The Uppercut, where I’ll be reviewing and analysing the biggest stories across the world of sport(with a hint of Irish emphasis). This week saw no let up in the Summer of Sport, as the stars of the golfing world descended on North-East England for the year’s final major, England looked to level the Ashes series, Hungary hosted the last Grand Prix before F1’s mid-season break, and Limerick went in search of a historic 4-in-a-row. But first, a look back at Ireland’s first World Cup match since 2002.

## Sheva Me Timbers
It had all been going to Vera Pauw’s carefully formulated plan. For 50 minutes, Ireland harassed and frustrated their more skilful hosts, who had already been dealt a body blow prior to kick off with the loss of their talismanic captain and face of the tournament, Chelsea’s Sam Kerr. Ireland dispelled any notions of their being ‘soft’ that may have arisen from the debacle against Colombia as they clattered into their opponents and defended resolutely, conceding just one shot on target from open play despite the Aussies dominating possession. Unfortunately, all it took was one moment of madness to unravel all of their good work, and when Marissa Sheva clattered into the back of Haley Raso while attempting to defend an incoming cross, the referee was left with no choice but to point to the penalty spot. American-born Sheva had been targeted and exposed by Australia throughout the first-half, and conceding the penalty was the final nail in the coffin on a night to forget for her. The Matildas’ stand-in captain Steph Catley dispatched the spot-kick with aplomb, allowing the home crowd to breath an enormous collective sigh of relief, and leaving the girls in green with a mountain to climb if they were to take anything from the game.

However, after recovering from the initial shock of conceding, Ireland came roaring back into the game, liberated by having nothing to lose. A few key substitutions replenished the flagging energy levels as green shirts flooded forward in search of an equaliser, roared on not just by the ex-pats in the stands but also by everyone watching at home. Katie McCabe and Megan Connolly both went close from set-pieces, but as the seconds ticked by, the absence of a genuine goal-scoring threat became painfully clear. A lack of composure in the box saw multiple chances go begging, Ireland being punished for their inability to ‘finish their dinner’. When the final whstle went, the home side celebrated an emotional win, while Ireland were left with an overwhelming sense of what could have been.

Of course, after the disappointment cleared, there were a huge amount of positives to take from the game. Perhaps none are more significant than proving they can play and belong at this level, which will give them great confidence going into can’t-lose games against Canada and Nigeria. The biggest question is why it took so long for Ireland to go on the offensive, which they more than proved they can in that final 30 minutes. Going forward, I would like to see this be the mindset from the off, rather than it taking us going behind to spring into life. If we are to take anything from these next two games, the positivity and pressure generated from taking the game to our opponents will be vital. To this end, Pauw may look at making some changes for the clash with Canada on Wednesday, and I would love to see 18-year old Abbie Larkin replace Sheva in the side. The teenager’s introduction against Australia, which made her the youngest player to represent Ireland at a major tournament, coincided with Ireland gaining a foothold in the game and her energy and skill was on consistent display as Ireland looked for that elusive goal. Having been earmarked as a huge talent for the future, she already looks the real deal.

Elsewhere in the World Cup, Australia were not the only highly-ranked team to struggle against supposed minnows. European champions England struggled to a 1-0 win over tournament debutants Haiti, while France were held to a 0-0 draw by a tenacious Jamaica. Japan and pre-tournament favourites the USA, both former champions, were more convincing as they easily took care of business against Zambia and Vietnam respectively. Spain, second-favourites to lift the trophy in a few weeks time, shrugged off allegations of a toxic team environment to run out 3-0 winners over Costa Rica, while Brazil and Germany showed they’re not there to mess around, netting 4 and 6 goals respectively while conceding none to open their tournaments.

One final word on the World Cup: it is a bit ridiculous that having played their opener in Sydney, Ireland will now fly 5 hours east to Perth to face Canada, before returning to the west coast of Australia to face Nigeria in Brisbane in their final group game. Not only is this sure to affect the players with the long flights and time-zone changes, but with sports coming under more and more scrutiny when it comes to their environmental impact, one must wonder why FIFA did not arrange for groups to be allocated to certain regions, e.g. Group A will play in and around Sydney, etc. This certainly would have cut down on the tournament’s carbon footprint, as well as keeping players fresher and making for a better product. Food for thought.

## In Perfect Harman-y
Perhaps the best indicator of the extent of Brian Harman’s domination of this year’s Open Championship was the rather subdued nature of the spectators as the tournament drew to a close. Of course, inclement weather and the lack of a hometown player in real contention were contributing factors, but really it was Harman’s assured play over the final three days and remarkable coolness in the face of mounting pressure that meant, when the tournament should have been reaching fever pitch, the atmosphere felt more akin to that of a practice round than the final 9 holes of a major championship. Harman himself admitted after the tournament that, at 36, he had begun to wonder whether his window for winning a major had closed, but to anyone watching it seemed like he had been in this position countless times before. After he opened up a 5-shot lead on Friday, a day when near-every other player struggled to corral the Royal Liverpool course, no one would come within 2 shots of him for the rest of the weekend. No doubt the cushion he had built for himself played a role in being able to quiet the nerves associated with trying to close out a first major win, but time and time again Harman closed the door on any would-be challengers.

The composure Harman displayed contrasted sharply with the play of Rory McIlroy, for whom another year has come and gone with no end to his 9-year major drought. Where Harman missed one putt within 10 feet all tournament, McIlroy consistently gave himself clear-cut birdie chances only to see the ball slide agonisingly past the hole, as the putting issues that have plagued him reared their ugly head in the biggest moments yet again. Tee to green, McIlroy showed why he is still considered one of, if not *the*, most talented players on tour, hitting some magnificent approach shots as time and again he threatened to make the run we all know he is capable of. However, until he rediscovers his form with putter in hand, McIlroy will only continue to add to the 29 top-10 major finishes since his last win.

With the Open being the last major of the year, the attention of the golfing world will now turn to the biennial competition between the United States and Europe, the Ryder Cup. This year’s iteration will take place just outside Rome, and Europe will be hoping home advantage can help them overturn the record 19-9 defeat they suffered last time around at Whistling Straits in Wisconsin. Unfortunately, form is against them as the USA currently boast a far stronger lineup, at least on paper, than their continental counterparts. In Wyndham Clark and Brian Harman, they will have two of this year’s major winners, as well as world number 1 Scottie Scheffler. While Europe will have big names like Jon Rahm and Rory McIlroy, as well as in-form Norwegian Viktor Hovland, their depth leaves a lot to be desired. Europe have often struggled to match the depth of the U.S. team, but in years past could rely upon Ryder Cup specialists like Ian Poulter and Sergio Garcia to level the playing field. With Shane Lowry dropping out of the automatic qualifying spots, it is hard to see who will be able to ignite the Europeans. In my opinion, Europe are headed for another resounding defeat, home advantage or not. Perhaps the only positive is that U.S. PGA Championship winner Brooks Koepka will be ineligible for the USA due to his defection to the now-defunct LIV Golf tour.

## 4th-Degree Byrnes 
While history was being made in Liverpool on Sunday afternoon, across the Irish Sea Limerick were attempting to do the same as they took on Kilkenny at Croke Park, knowing victory would see them win their 4th All-Ireland Hurling Championship in a row. Symbolically, the last team to achieve such a feat was Kilkenny with their 06-09 vintage, led by the legendary Henry Shefflin. By about 5:15pm in Ireland, no one was doubting that names like Cian Lynch and Diarmaid Byrnes would be uttered with the same reverence in years to come, as Limerick claimed a ferocious contest despite not scoring any 3-point goals, instead content to patiently put the ball over the bar and keep the scoreboard ticking over.

The game began and continued at breakneck speed as both teams brought great physicality to the contest, Kilkenny edging the early exchanges. When Paddy Deegan nosed Kilkenny in front, it was the first time Limerick had trailed in an All-Ireland final since 2018. However, despite their upper hand, Kilkenny only went in to half-time 3 points ahead, an ominous sign against a team known for strong 3rd quarters and blowing teams away in short, explosive bursts. And so it came to pass. When Deegan ripped a hole in Limerick’s net shortly after the break to put Kilkenny up by 5, only the most optimistic of Black Cats fans would have thought the contest was over, but few could have imagined the scale of the turnaround. After that goal, Limerick outscored their Leinster counterparts by 19 points to 5 in a whirlwind period where they showed just why they are one of the greatest teams of all-time, eventually claiming a victory every bit as dominant as Harman’s. Limerick went up several notches, appearing unable to miss as Byrnes finished with 7 points, becoming the highest scoring defender in history in the process. Simultaneously, Kilkenny seemed to shrink in the face of the onslaught, succumbing to basic errors and in the end, their challenge petered out with a whimper. Questions will now inevitably turn to whether they can make it 5 in a row next year, especially given their ageing squad which showed signs of slowing down across this years Munster and All-Ireland Championships. But winning championships is a mental battle as well as physical, and if that last 25 minutes is anything to go by, Limerick show no signs of receding in that department.

## When it Rains, It Pours
England’s ambitions of reclaiming the Ashes from Australia ended in a farce as two days of downpour in Manchester cancelled the final two days of the 5-day test. Only managing about two hours of play on Saturday and none on Sunday, the match ended in a tie, meaning the Aussies can do no worse than tie the series regardless of how the 5th and final test pans out, which as current holders means they will retain the Ashes. The fact that there are no contingencies despite such a heavy dependence on weather, especially in a test match of such magnitude, damages the credibility of a sport already dealing with the challenge of trying to attract new fans. Throw in the fact that the tea break on Saturday was taken despite the knowledge that rain was imminent, and ‘Lunch’ was declared during the only dry period on Sunday, and the whole thing becomes frankly laughable. Unfortunately, much like golf, cricket leans heavily on ‘traditions’, and the thought of changing anything about the sport is anathema to the governing bodies.

For the first three days, we were treated to a cricket-clinic, as England showed why Bazball is creating so many new fans and bringing old ones(this writer included) back to the game. Winning the toss for the 4th time in a row, England again elected to bowl first, meaning they would be chasing a score to win should the match get to the end of the 2nd innings. After bowling Australia all-out for 317 on a surface perfect for batting, England proceeded to dismantle Australia’s vaunted bowling attack, widely regarded as the finest in the world. Australia, having lost their ace spin-bowler Nathan Lyons to injury in the 2nd test, opted not to pick a spinner this time around, instead backing their fast-bowling attack in a decision that looked certain to cost them the test. Led by opener Zac Crawley, who went for 189 runs alone, England opened up a 260-run lead by the middle of Day 3(Friday) and it looked for all the world as if the series would go to a deciding 5th test with the scores 2-2. However, with one eye on the weekend’s forecast, Australia returned to bat knowing that if they could delay long enough, there was a high chance the weather would become a major factor. And so it proved, as England could only muster five wickets before the game was abandoned.

And so the series returns to London on Thursday, where England will look to salvage a tie and prevent Australia from winning a first Ashes series on English soil since 2001. It is sure to be a fascinating test as both sides look to end on a high, and the possibility of tying the series will be motivation-aplenty for this England side. Here’s hoping we get some fireworks to end the series on a high, and the weekend’s debacle results in serious changes to ensure it doesn’t happen again.

## Overtime
A round up of stories you may have missed from the world of sports…

### Runaway Bulls
Max Verstappen claimed his 9th win and Red Bull their 11th out of 11 races this season on Sunday at the Hungaroring. Lewis Hamilton in his Mercedes managed to claim his first pole position in Qualifying since 2021, but was helpless come race time as Verstappen, as he has been wont to do this season, took the lead at the first corner and sailed off into the distance. The Red Bull of 2023 has proved nothing short of unstoppable, with rivals unable to even remotely challenge for race wins so far this season. Their dominance is threatening, and breaking, some long-standing records. Sunday’s Hungarian Grand Prix was their 12th consecutive win dating back to last season, breaking McLaren’s record of 11 consecutive victories set in 1988. McLaren’s other record from that season, losing just one race, is also under threat, with Red Bull in with a very real shout of being the first constructor to win every race in a season. Unfortunately, this doesn’t make for very exciting viewing, as many fans who started paying attention during the height of the Hamilton-Verstappen rivalry are now finding out.

### Mbappe on the Move?
With Kylian Mbappe, arguably the best footballer in the world right now, refusing to sign a new contract at his current club PSG, and PSG not wanting to let Mbappe leave for free when he becomes a free agent next summer, it has become a question of when, not if, Mbappe will be sold. But other clubs know PSG’s lack of leverage, and have not agreed to meet PSG’s asking price yet. Enter the Saudis. On Monday, Saudi Pro league side Al-Hilal bid a whopping £259m for Mbappe’s services, and have reportedly prepared a £200m-a-year contract for the French superstar, which includes a one-year optional break to allow him to join Real Madrid next season. A number of ageing(and some not-so-ageing) players have begun to move to the Saudi league in pursuit of huge paydays, but the question remains whether Mbappe, who is sure to command a huge salary regardless of where he plays, will give up a year of playing in the Champions League to compete in a league that doesn’t exactly rank among the most prestigious in the world. Whatever the outcome, Saudi money will continue to flow into football as the state looks to brush over their appalling human rights record, and it will soon be the norm to watch top-class players leave Europe for the promise of extreme wealth.

### Great Dane
Denmark’s Jonas Vingegaard claimed back-to-back Tour de France titles in Paris on Sunday, beating two-time winner Tadej Pogacar of Slovenia by 7 minutes and 29 seconds across the tour. For 15 stages, the pair were virtually neck-and-neck, with Vingegaard holding a slender 10 second lead, but in the final few stages Vingegaard flexed his muscles and opened up a wide advantage, eventually running out a comfortable winner and celebrating with his team as he crossed the line on the iconic Champs Elysees.

### Mageean Plays Her Cards Right
Ciara Mageean ran a magnificent mile at the Athletics Diamond League meeting in Monaco on Friday, smashing Sonia O’Sullivan’s long-held Irish record to finish second behind Kenya’s Faith Kipyegon, who herself broke her own World Record for the distance. Meanwhile, Ireland’s 20-year old superstar Rhasidat Adeleke competed at her first Diamond League meeting since turning pro, finishing 4th in a race filled with Olympic-medal hopefuls. With the Games in France just a year away, Irish athletics is looking in as healthy a place as it’s ever been.


Finally(and fittingly for the All-Ireland champions), I’ll leave you with a Limerick. See you next week!

*Seems Australia dont need a spinner*  
*And Ireland need to finish their dinner*  
*Mbappe’s going to Saudi*  
*Limerick are getting rowdy*  
*Old Harman’s a worthy winner*
