---
layout: post
title:  "The Uppercut - Kane on Fire in Germany"
---
*You can also listen to an audio version of this article on Souncloud! [Click here to listen!](https://soundcloud.app.goo.gl/dY3WwTXc4VGG457g9)*

*You can subscribe to the Uppercut by following @simoonssnaps on Instagram, or emailing @theuppercutblog@gmail.com to receive new post notifications.*

With the Rugby World Cup now over, it was a quieter weekend in the sporting world, but the Uppercut has still managed to pick out a few interesting talking points. This week, I'll discuss Mikel Arteta's outburst in the Premier League, how the NFL is shaping up at the midway point of the season, and the latest events in the tennis and Formula 1 spheres. But first, a look at football on the European continent, where two Englishmen have been impressing...

## An Englishman Abroad
After one of the more back-and-forth transfer sagas in recent memory(typical ‘Spurs), Harry Kane’s departure from Tottenham to European giants Bayern Munich for a fee of €110m in the end came as somewhat of a surprise. Spurs’ chairman Dan Levy seemed determined to hold on to the England captain, who had spent 9 senior seasons and several years of his youth playing for the North London club. Despite becoming Spurs’ all-time leading goal scorer and topping the Premier League scoring charts on numerous occasions, Kane’s empty trophy cabinet remained a stick his critics relished using to beat him with, and his itch to leave had become evident in recent years. Eventually, Bayern came calling, and Spurs had to relent.

Having lost prolific striker Robert Lewandowski to Barcelona the summer before, Bayern were in need of a new poacher. From Kane’s perspective, the perennial Bundesliga winners were the perfect suitors, even if it meant giving up(for now) on the chance to break the Premier League goal record. It appeared a match made in football heaven, and if the first few months of the season are anything to go by, that is exactly how it has transpired. In his first 10 games in the Bundesliga, Kane has scored 15 times, including an effort from the half-way line last week against FC Darmstadt. He followed that up with a hat-trick this most recent weekend in Der Klassiker, Bayern’s biennial clash with rivals Borussia Dortmund. This recent iteration had some added spice to it after Munich stole the Bundesliga title from under Dortmund’s nose on the final weekend of last season, but it turned out to be a non-event as Bayern scored twice in the first 10 minutes to eventually romp home 4-0 winners. At the rate Kane is scoring, he is on track to smash Lewandowski’s single-season record of 41 goals, only set in 2021, but no doubt the personal accolades fade in comparison to the opportunity of helping to secure Munich’s 11th league title in as many years, and in the process lift the first trophy of his career.

The Englishman’s arrival to the Bundesliga coincided with the departure of another, as 20-year old Jude Bellingham converted his stunning form at Borussia Dortmund into a move to the Galacticos of Real Madrid. Any notion that the youngster might struggle at such a big club has been swiftly dispelled, as he has fit in seamlessly to Carlo Ancelotti’s outfit. With legendary midfielders Lula Modric and Toni Kroos beginning to show their age, Bellingham has filled the void, popping up with 10 goals in his first 11 games. They have not been the 3rd or 4th goal of a 5-0 drubbing of Cadiz either, with almost all of his goals coming in games in which Los Blancos were trailing or tied. Bellingham’s form has so far papered over the fact that Real Madrid failed to adequately replace 2022 Ballon d’Or winner Karim Benzema up front, and it must be at least marginally worrying for Ancelotti that the majority of their goals have come from a 20-year old midfielder. But for now, they sit 2nd in La Liga behind unlikely frontrunners Girona, and thanks to Bellingham secured a 2-1 win last week in El Classico against hated rivals Barcelona. With the self-proclaimed best league in the world, and 2 of their biggest stars dominating the Spanish and German leagues, it will be all the more satisfying when England inevitably crash out of next summer’s European Championships. And yes, I am just jealous that Ireland are already assured of not being there.

## The Eagles Are Coming
We are officially at the mid-point of the NFL’s 18-week regular season, and while there are certainly good teams and bad teams, the level of parity is notable with no teams clearly distinguishing themselves as favourites to lift the Lombardi Trophy in Las Vegas next February. Last season’s nearly-men, the Philadelphia Eagles, currently hold the league’s best record at 8-1, but have arguably shown more frailties than at this point last year. 4th-year quarterback Jalen Hurts has looked every bit the franchise cornerstone that he is, but has still thrown some silly interceptions that Eagles fans would have liked to have seen ironed out by this stage. Their fearsome defensive front also has not matched their form of 2022, but grinding out victories can often be a greater sign of a team’s mental fortitude than blowing teams away. Barring a bad spate of injuries or a historic collapse, Philly will be right there come the business end of the season.

They have been helped by some teams faltering around them, none more so than the San Francisco 49ers. After starting the season 5-0 and looking near-unstoppable with Brock Purdy running offensive mastermind Kyle Shanahan’s schemes to a tee, the wheels have come off of sorts. Purdy, who had looked unflappable despite being the last pick of the 2022 draft, has been a different quarterback of late, hurt massively by injuries to superstar wide receiver Deebo Samuel, and as such the Niners have dropped their last 3 games. Playing in a weak NFC West division, there is no fear of them missing the playoffs, but fans in the Bay Area will be praying they once again see the juggernaut that started the season when San Francisco return from their bye week next Sunday. The rest of the National Football Conference has been plagued by injuries and inconsistency, with the Minnesota Vikings losing quarterback Kirk Cousins and wide receiver Justin Jefferson just as they were beginning to find form to all but put pay to their chances this season. Their division rivals, the oft-maligned Detroit Lions, look certain to win the NFC North behind an explosive offense, but in my opinion it would take a major improvement to turn over the Eagles or Niners, especially as they are likely to be on the road in the playoffs. The only team with a realistic chance of challenging the top 2 in the NFC are America’s Team, the Dallas Cowboys. Boasting a talent-rich roster, Dallas can be lethal on both sides of the ball, but often show the sorts of mental errors in big games that have plagued the franchise since winning 3 Super Bowls in 4 years in the ‘90s. Falling short this past weekend against an Eagles team determined to hand them the game was evidence of that, and the intensity of the playoffs are a whole different kettle of fish. Add in that they will likely have no home playoff games by dint of being in the same division as the Eagles(likely to progress as division winners), and the road to a title looks paved with danger for the Dem Boys.

If the NFC has too few contenders, the AFC has perhaps too many. The Super Bowl champion Kansas City Chiefs have gotten off to a shaky start but have found a way to win games through their defence, with Patrick Mahomes yet to hit top gear. His best weapon, tight-end Travis Kelce, due to perhaps his age or the distraction of his budding relationship with Taylor Swift, has not been producing like in recent seasons, and Mahomes has been unable to greatly elevate the play of his other skill players. However, they still sit at 7-2, and recovered from a slow start last season to end up champions, so remain the team to beat in the AFC. 

The most competitive division in football currently is the AFC North, with the Baltimore Ravens, Cincinnati Bengals and Cleveland Browns all very much in the playoff race. The former two can realistically call themselves Super Bowl contenders, with Lamar Jackson loving life in Baltimore having signed a 5-year, $260m($185m *guaranteed*) contract this past offseason. He has been an assured presence at quarterback this season, and their defence has played complementary football to see the Ravens to a 7-2 record, tied for best in the Conference. The Bengals, meanwhile, look a team rejuvenated since Joe Burrow’s return to full health, and are perhaps the hottest team in the NFL at the time of writing. Star receivers Ja’Marr Chase and Tee Higgins represent one of the best receiving duos in the league, and with a Super Bowl appearance after the 2021 season, this is a team who know how to win big games. Like the Eagles and Cowboys, only one team can win this division, but I could see either making a run.

Injuries have crippled two of the frontrunners in the AFC East, with the Miami Dolphins and Buffalo Bills duking it out at 6-3 and 5-4 respectively, the Bills winning the first of their two match-ups this season. Miami’s offense, with all their weapons healthy, has looked at times unstoppable, and at others stagnant. Their defence has been ravaged by the injury bug, but if they can stay in the hunt and get their players back for the run-in, they could be dark horses when January rolls around. The Buffalo Bills, having dominated the division for a number of years, have struggled massively of late and questions are being asked about whether they have missed their Super Bowl window. Quarterback Josh Allen has always played as if he was in his back garden, but mistakes at this level have consequences, and there have been more of those this season than previously. Both franchises are well ahead of the side who used to dominate the division and strike fear into every team in the league. Behind Tom Brady and Bill Belichick, the New England Patriots won an unprecedented 6 Super Bowls in 17 years, but the magic has well and truly worn off. After Brady left in 2020, the Patriots have slid backwards, and sitting at 2-7 are now in with a very real chance of picking 1st overall in next year’s draft. Taking a quarterback there is no guarantee of success either, as this past few weeks have shown. The Carolina Panthers traded up to take Bryce Young with the 1st pick of the 2023 Draft, but it is no. 2 pick C.J. Stroud of the Houston Texans who has been lighting up the league and has his team in playoff contention. Dark times ahead for the reeling Patriots.

## Overtime
### Arteta’s Angst
Another Premier League weekend, another VAR controversy, this time coming in Arsenal’s top-6 clash Newcastle. The game finished 1-0 to the Magpies, with the only goal heavily scrutinised by the Video Assistant Referee. First, there was a check to see if the ball had gone out of play in the build-up. Next, whether Joelinton had fouled Gabriel as the ball arrived into the box, and finally if Anthony Gordon was offside before bundling the ball into the net. While I believe Joelinton did in fact foul Gabriel, all 3 were marginal calls, and it is unfair to claim that VAR actually got any of the them wrong. However, Arsenal manager Mikel Arteta disagreed, and went on a furious tirade against the officiating in his post-match press conference, describing the situation as ‘embarrassing’, a ‘disgrace’ and felt he was ‘wasting [his] time’. While managers are of course going to be emotional after a tough loss, the only thing that was embarrassing was his reaction, especially given he had defended the officials a few weeks prior when a decision had gone his team’s way. Funny that. There are situations where anger at a decision is understandable, for example when Liverpool were denied a goal against Spurs due to a very real error a few weeks ago. But in this case, there was truly nothing obvious, and the fact that Arsenal released a statement backing Arteta to the hilt was disappointing. The standard of officiating is only going to decline after incidents like this, with current officials under even more pressure, and any prospective referees likely to be turned off pursuing that career by the level of vitriol we have seen over the last few seasons. If these teams and managers were truly so enraged by the quality of refereeing, they might show the same level of discontent when a decision goes the way of their team.

### Age is But a Number
As Fernando Alonso showed on Sunday in Sao Paolo, producing one of the greatest drives of his career to claim 3rd at the Brazilian Grand Prix at the ripe old age of 42. Coming home behind the unstoppable Max Verstappen of Red Bull and McLaren’s Lando Norris, Alonso held off Verstappen’s team-mate Sergio Perez, driving a far superior car, for almost 20 laps, showing all the smarts and tactical nous that will see him take his place amongst the greatest drivers of all time when he eventually hangs up his fire-retardant race suit. Perez is fighting for his Formula 1 career, and looked to have got the job done on the penultimate lap, only for Alonso to come back at him to retake the position. They crossed the line just 0.053 seconds apart. Alonso’s team, Aston Martin, started the season brightly with the Spaniard taking 6 podiums in the first 8 races. However, their form dramatically dropped off as their supposed ‘upgrades’ had the opposite effect, until a reemergence this past weekend. If Aston Martin can carry the momentum into next season, we may see a few more Alonso masterclasses yet.

### Swiatek Aces the Test
Iga Swiatek won the season-ending WTA Finals at a canter to finish the year as World Number 1. The 22-year old Pole swept aside the challenge of American Jessica Pegula in under an hour, running out a 6-1, 6-0 victor to win the event for the first time. Having spent most of the last year as the no. 1, Swiatek lost the top spot in September to Czech Aryna Sabalenka, but now returns to the spot she held for 75 successive weeks. With 4 Grand Slam titles already to her name and a dominant record on clay, 2024 may be the year she separates herself from the crowd, but with the Tour Finals taking place in Cancún, I’m sure she’ll have allowed herself some time to enjoy the achievement!

*Munich dominating, to Kane's delight*  
*While Bellingham revels in Madrid white*  
*Iga's on top*  
*Arteta's in a strop*  
*At 42, Fernando's still got fight*  
