---
layout: post
title:  "The Uppercut - And Then There Were Two"
---
*You can also listen to an audio version of this article on Souncloud! [Click here to listen!](https://on.soundcloud.com/tU8u3arXCr1iLay67)*

*You can subscribe to the Uppercut by following @simoonssnaps on Instagram, or emailing @theuppercutblog@gmail.com to receive new post notifications.*

Welcome back to the Uppercut, where this week I'll be discussing the start of a new season of NBA basketball, the return of the Premier League and an entertaining London derby, the goings-on in India at the Cricket World Cup, and some newcomers to the Olympic scene. But first, a look at how the Rugby World Cup semi-finals played out over the weekend...

## Scrumdog Millionaires
The feeling after last week’s Rugby World Cup quarter-finals was that perhaps the best of the tournament was behind us, and so it proved after witnessing this weekend’s semi-finals. Neither game came anywhere close to the quality of any of those matches, let alone the Ireland-New Zealand and France-South Africa epics. On Friday night, it was hard not to watch the All Blacks pummel a sorry Argentinian side into submission and wonder what could have been for Ireland. Los Pumas had their moments, and the game could have been much closer had they converted a few of their forays into New Zealand’s ‘22 in the first half, but ultimately their direct-running and lack of deception left an easy task for an All Blacks defence that had largely repelled Ireland’s vastly more intricate attack a week prior. New Zealand were far more clinical than their opponents, and leading 12-6 with 5 minutes to play in the first-half, scored 10 points in rapid fashion to break Los Pumas’ will. The second-half was more of the same, as the All Blacks’ skill with ball in hand - the best in World Rugby - left Argentinian defenders chasing ghosts, no more so than on Will Jordan’s try-of-the-tournament contender, beginning with a slaloming run from his own 22 that showcased his immense pace and finished with an inch-perfect chip over the top to complete his hat-trick. The 38-point margin was just 5 points off the largest semi-final thumping of all time, by New Zealand over Wales in 1987.

Viewers on Saturday were treated to a nail-biting, albeit stop-start affair as England and South Africa faced off in a repeat of the previous World Cup final. The smart money was with South Africa before the game, but England like nothing more than to rustle a few feathers, and they started the game the brighter side, taking advantage of the inclement conditions to unsettle their opponents. Predictably, their game-plan consisted of kicking, more kicking and if that didn’t work, kick it again. Not exactly an advertisement for the sport, but it was effective, and a 9-3 lead after 30 minutes was enough for the Springboks’ coaching ticket to yank out-of-sorts out-half Manie Libbok for Handre Pollard in an attempt to steady the ship. Farrell and Pollard traded penalties, giving England a 12-6 lead at half-time. Despite being clearly the better team, it always felt as if one England slip-up was all that was required for the Springboks to grab the lead and kill the game, especially when their Bomb Squad bench entered the fray. However, when Owen Farrell kicked a long-range drop-goal with the sweetest of strikes, giving England a 9-point buffer, I must admit I started to believe they might do it. The score remained 15-6 for some time but the South African bench was beginning to do a number on the England scrum, and the pressure told when RG Snyman crashed over from short-range with 10 minutes to play to bring the ‘Boks within 2 points. England could afford no penalties in their own half, but a 76th-minute scrum gave way with referee Ben O’Keefe siding with the South Africans. Up stepped Handre Pollard to smash home the 3-pointer from 49 metres, affirming his coaching staff’s risky move to parachute him into the squad after hooker Malcolm Marx’s injury. A heartbroken England can take solace in their gritty display, but ultimately their inability to test the South African defence cost them in a second-half where they only managed 3 points. Developing an attack will be Steve Borthwick’s next challenge, but it is perhaps for the good of the tournament that South Africa march on to face the All Blacks next Saturday.

The final is a fascinating match-up of two teams who have been on wildly different trajectories since the tournament began. Just 8 weeks ago, South Africa pummelled their arch-nemesis New Zealand 35-7 in a warm-up match at Twickenham. Many wrote the All Blacks off as contenders after that, and a loss to France on the opening weekend only compounded the feeling that this would not be their year. However, 3 easy fixtures were enough to rebuild the confidence, and they produced a quite brilliant performance to knock-off the tournament’s form team in Ireland. They now arrive in the final after little more than a kickabout with the Argentinians, in which they voluntary finished the game with 14 men, and playing their best rugby of this 4-year cycle. South Africa, on the other hand, look decimated by their rough schedule. A tough pool saw them beat Scotland but lose to Ireland in a hugely physical clash, before they had to draw on all their emotional and physical reserves to knock out hosts France at the quarter-final stage. It is almost no surprise that they struggled against an England side whose toughest games to that point had been Argentina and Fiji, but the question remains whether they have anything left to give against a New Zealand team hell-bent on revenge. All through this tournament, I have felt that, were they to meet, the All Blacks simply wouldn’t be able to live with the Springboks’ physicality. However, I think South Africa are sufficiently spent in that area to allow the All Blacks perhaps not parity, but a foothold in the game. From there, they can be devastating, and I believe if South Africa are to win this game, they will have to show more attacking intent than at any other point in the competition so far. Whether they can suddenly do that, especially after such a difficult run to the final, is a totally different question, and for that reason many will be picking New Zealand this week. However, after going back-and-forth on my prediction several times, I just have a feeling that the Springboks are battle-hardened and have one more big performance in their locker to complete Rassie's masterpiece.

**Prediction:New Zealand 24-27 South Africa**

## Hoops & Dreams
The NBA returns to our screens this week as the regular season gets underway on Tuesday night with some explosive matchups, as the 4 best teams in the Western Conference heading into the season get a chance to put down an early marker. First off, the defending champion Denver Nuggets take on Lebron James’ Los Angeles Lakers in a repeat of last year’s Western Conference finals. The Nuggets have retained much of the team that cantered to a championship just a few months ago, including 2-time MVP Nikola Jokic. ‘The Joker’ has been one of the most dominant players in the NBA since he joined in 2015, and last year’s championship run, when he was named Finals MVP, was the crowning moment of his career. It would be a surprise if he is not in the running for MVP again this year. The Lakers are also largely unchanged from last season, perhaps surprisingly so given the roster behind James and All-Star teammate Anthony Davis is not the strongest. James will turn 39 during the season, and while he can still go toe-to-toe with the best, he will need his supporting cast to pull their weight. Tuesday’s other matchup sees the former teammates Kevin Durant and Steph Curry go head-to-head as the Phoenix Suns travel to the Bay Area to play the Golden State Warriors. Between Durant, Devin Booker and the incoming Bradley Beal, the Suns have enough firepower on offense to match any team, but the question mark for them is whether they have improved on the defensive side of the ball. One team that did not struggle on that side of the ball last season was the Warriors, but their concerns are largely around age, as the heartbeats of their dominant teams over the past decade begin to get up there in years. Curry remains one of the most-feared players in the league with his ability to drain 3-pointers seemingly at will, and even at 38 the addition of Chris Paul will add another dimension. Add in Klay Thompson’s ability to get red-hot, and this is still a team capable of winning a championship.

The favourites for the Eastern Conference, as they have been for the past few years due to the Greek Freak’s presence, are the Milwaukee Bucks. Giannis Antetokounmpo is widely considered the most unguardable player in the League, due to his freakish athleticism and size. After finally guiding the Bucks to a Championship in 2021, he has been unable to bring them back to the promised land, but the addition of All-Star Damian Lillard from the Portland Trail Blazers may be exactly what they need. However in securing the services of Lillard, the Bucks gave up one of the best 2-way players in the game in the form of Jrue Holliday, who wound up at the Bucks’ biggest rivals for the Eastern Conference, the Boston Celtics. The Celtics - who reached the NBA Finals in 2022 off the back of their two stars, Jayson Tatum and Jayden Brown - have lost two important members of the locker room in Marcus Smart and young center Robert Williams, but after years of being the nearly men, perhaps a shake-up was needed. With Holliday and veteran Kristaps Porzingis joining Tatum and Brown, this is a formidable opponent for any team. The Bucks and Celtics will open their seasons against two other East contenders, the Philadelphia 76ers and the New York Knicks. The 76ers are led by 2022-23 MVP Joel Embiid and volatile superstar James Harden, and are an excellent team at both ends of the court. However in years of competing at the top of the Conference, they have been unable to make so much as a Finals appearance, and despite their motto being ‘Trust the Process’, 6ers fans may wonder just when the process is going to bear fruit. The Knicks, on the other hand, are a relative newcomer to the contenders’ circle following years of being lost in the wilderness. Last year’s addition of Jalen Brunson to complement RJ Barrett and Julius Randle worked a treat, and with a season together under their belt they’ll hope to close the gap to the top 3.

All eyes will be on the 2023 Draft’s 1st overall pick, Victor Wembanyama, who begins his career at the San Antonio Spurs under the tutelage of legendary coach Gregg Popovich. Standing at 7ft 4in, Wembenyama is one of the most imposing figures you’ll see around, but his true brilliance is that even at that height, he has great skill with the ball in hand and can punish teams from 3-point range. The closest comparison currently in the league is Kevin Durant, but Wembenyama is even bigger. If the stars align, and if his preseason highlights are anything to go by, the 19-year old Frenchman has the potential to do historic things.

With its 82-game regular season, the NBA can be difficult to maintain a rooting interest in, at the very least until the playoffs get underway in April. However, with its spectacular highlights and wild momentum swings which can result in huge comebacks, the NBA is a great background product, something you can dip into every now and then without getting too invested in any one game. I’ll be rooting for the Boston Celtics to finally get over the hump and if I’m making a season prediction, I’ll say they beat the Warriors in a repeat of the 2022 NBA Finals.

## London is… Purple?
The Premier League returned following the International Break last weekend, and in the marquee matchup of the week Arsenal trekked across the city to Stamford Bridge to take on rivals Chelsea. Arsenal entered the game as the last unbeaten side in the league, flying high off the back of a 1-0 victory over Manchester City in their last outing, while Chelsea had begun to show some green shoots after a disastrous start to the season. That momentum continued as they started the game the stronger, and took advantage of VAR flagging a William Saliba handball for Cole Palmer to coolly put them 1-0 up after 15 minutes. Arsenal began to dominate possession but struggled to create anything of note, with Chelsea looking more likely to score when they managed to break out. It was more of the same in the 2nd half, and Chelsea went 2-0 when Mikhailo Mudryk sent what looked like a cross flying over the surprised David Raya into the Arsenal goal, cuing wild celebrations from the home crowd. Mudryk has failed to live up to his huge price tag since joining Chelsea 10 months ago, but 2 goals in his last 3 games will surely do his confidence no end of good. For Arsenal, it was another twist in the goalkeeper saga. Despite quality play from Aaron Ramsdale in the Arsenal goal last season, the Gunners went and brought in David Raya from Brentford to compete for the starting job. Raya has now usurped Ramsdale, despite the latter generally performing when given a chance. A penny for Ramsdale’s thoughts as he watched the ball sail into Raya’s net. Arsenal again dominated without looking too threatening following that goal, but Chelsea’s inexperience in these high-intensity matches showed, as Declan Rice calmly punished a huge error from Chelsea goalkeeper Robert Sanchez 15 minutes from time to halve the deficit. The comeback was complete and unbeaten recorded saved when substitute Leandro Trossard popped up at the back post to get on the end of Bukayo Saka’s cross and level the proceedings. Arsenal have shown an impressive ability to fight back in games they look certain to lose, and there’s no questioning their mental toughness. For Chelsea, there was plenty to be positive about despite the disappointment of letting a statement win slip away, but their upcoming schedule will leave little room for error as 5 of their next 6 games come against teams ranked higher than them in the table.

The early afternoon game saw Everton visit Anfield for the Merseyside derby. After a ghastly start, Everton had won 3 of their last 4 in all competitions, while Liverpool were sat in 3rd but had dropped 4 points in their last 2 games. Merseyside derbies are rarely high-scoring affairs and this was no difference as both teams had just one shot on target in the first-half, but Everton faced an uphill battle after losing Ashley Young to a red card. VAR assisted in the decision to send Young off, but had declined to do the same for a very similar case involving Liverpool defender Ibrahima Konate. Needless to say, Jürgen Klopp was not calling for a replay of the match when VAR decisions went his side’s way. Not a team built to chase a game, it felt like a Liverpool goal would bury Everton, but it took until the 75th-minute for Mo Salah to slot home the opening goal from the penalty spot following a Michael Keane handball. With Everton pushing for an equaliser, Liverpool caught them on the break for Salah to double his total and secure all 3 points for the Reds.

The result of the weekend went to Aston Villa, who swept aside West Ham 4-1 in what I’m dubbing the Clash of the Clarets due to their similarly-hued kits. West Ham in their white away strip were no match for Unai Emery’s outfit, who have started the season with intent. After leading a revival last season following Steven Gerrard’s mid-season firing, I expected Emery to keep Villa competitive but to come down to Earth a bit. So far, that has been far from the truth, as the Villains have continued their hot streak to be right amongst it in the fight for the Champions League spots. Douglas Luiz in midfield looks a tremendous player, while Ollie Watkins’ goalscoring form has earned him a recall to the England squad. An all-round solid team that is capable of scoring plenty of goals, Villa look a tough out for any opponent. Time will tell whether they have the squad depth to make a true push for Champions League football(8 outfield players have started every game so far), but for now the good times keep rolling.

Elsewhere around the league, Manchester City and Manchester United prepared for next week’s Manchester Derby with 2-1 wins over Brighton and Sheffield United respectively. City’s clash with Brighton was billed as the battle between the two best tacticians in the league in Pep Guardiola and Roberto de Zerbi, but it was Guardiola’s men who prevailed. City have not been on top form so far this season, but they’ll have been delighted to see Erling Haaland return to the scoresheet, while new Belgian winger Jeremy Doku looks set to terrorise Premier League full-backs for years to come. United, for their part, took to the pitch just a few hours after the news of United and England legend Sir Bobby Charlton’s passing at the age of 86, and Diogo Dalot produced a top-class winner with 15 minutes to play to ensure United provided a fitting tribute to the 1966 World Cup-winning captain. Both teams will compete in the Champions League this week before their clash this Sunday, as will Newcastle, who have been rocked in recent days with the betting scandal surrounding their £55m signing, Sandro Tonali. It is alleged that during his time in Milan, Tonali and some teammates were illegally gambling on football matches, including those involving Milan, and the 23-year old now faces the possibility of a 3-year suspension. Tonali’s manager has said that Tonali is ‘playing the most important game of his life’ in his battle to overcome his gambling addiction, and here’s hoping the talented midfielder can get the help he needs. He played what could be his last game at St. James’ Park for some time on Saturday as Newcastle thrashed Crystal Palace 4-0 in a ruthless display, the 4th time this season they have scored 4+ goals across all competitions.

## Overtime
### Another World Cup
New Zealand and South Africa fans are not only experiencing the spoils of victory in France, but their national teams are right in contention at the Cricket World Cup currently taking place in India. Unlike the 5-day long Test matches, the World Cup is comprised of one-day matches, where each side puts up as big a score as it can in 50 overs(300 balls). The 10-team tournament is halfway through its ‘round-robin’ phase where every team plays each other, with South Africa, New Zealand and Australia currently making up 3 of the 4 qualification spots. They are behind hosts India, the only unbeaten side in the competition with 5 wins from 5. On the way, they have dispatched arch-rivals Pakistan is front of a mind-boggling 132,000 people, and defeated previously-unbeaten New Zealand on Sunday to re-affirm their favourites status. Holders England are in dire-straits with just 1 win, and before the rugby suffered a historic defeat at the hands of South Africa on Saturday. They face an uphill battle to qualify for the semi-finals.

### Olympics Newcomers
Speaking of cricket, the International Olympic Committee announced its list of new sports set to join the Summer Games from 2028 this past week, with the old game added to the slate for the first time since 1900. I’m generally not a fan of popular sports like football or golf at the Olympics, as I feel the Olympics should be the pinnacle of any included sport, and my guess is that if asked whether they would rather win the World Cup/the Masters or an Olympic gold, many players in those sports would opt for the former. In my opinion cricket is no different, but the thinking behind it is that it will increase Olympic viewing figures in areas like India where the Olympics typically has not made much of an impression. Along with cricket, some classic American sports have been added to the slate, including lacrosse, baseball and softball, in which the hosts will no doubt be expected to claim gold. Hilariously, flag football(tag rugby but for Americn football) has been included, despite the overwhelming majority of global players hailing from one country. Good luck to any nation trying to stop Patrick Mahomes throwing lasers to Justin Jefferson.

That's all for this week, thank you very much for reading/listening and as always, please feel free to share any thoughts/comments!

*New Zealand and South Africa in the race for 4*  
*England so close, Argentina poor*  
*Wemby's ready to take over*  
*But I'll be supporting the Celtics and their clover*  
*Aston Villa are on the hunt for more*
