---
layout: post
title:  "The Uppercut - A Year of Olympian Proportions"
---
*Unfortunately I have run out of free uploads on Soundcloud, but you can now access the audio version of this article on Google Drive! [Click here to listen!](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1eyyfh2e5y98z6Cjt8fi6knm8D4jQdvuf/view?usp=drivesdk)*  

*You can subscribe to the Uppercut by following @simoonssnaps on Instagram, or emailing @theuppercutblog@gmail.com to receive new post notifications.*  

Welcome back to the Uppercut, and a very happy New Year to all! With the new year comes new hopes, new aspirations, and most importantly, new sporting intrigue. For some sports, like football and rugby, we are into the business end of the season, when a team’s mettle is tested to the full and the true contenders separate themselves from the pack. For others, like tennis and golf, a fresh start beckons, with every competitor determined to make 2024 their year. And that’s not to mention the huge summer ahead, when Europe’s top football teams will travel to Germany with the goal of being crowned the continent’s best team, before the best athletes in the world descend on Paris for the 33rd edition of the modern Summer Olympic Games. What a year we have in store, but if you’d rather not know how it is all going to turn out, then I encourage you to read/listen no further!

Here are my predictions for the sporting year, 2024.

## No Dupont, No Problem
Following a slew of retirements across the 6 teams, it will be a transitional 6 Nations after a brutal World Cup once again dominated by the Southern Hemisphere. France and Ireland were the strongest teams for the Northern Hemisphere(albeit England’s 3rd-place finish was the best result) and look set to once again duke it out for the 6 Nations crown. Ireland have lost their talismanic out-half in Johnny Sexton, and with some other members of the squad getting on in years, they may take a step back from the performances of last year which saw them claim only a 4th Grand Slam in their history. France, for their part, will be missing the best player in the world in Antoine Dupont, who has chosen to pursue Olympic glory with the French Sevens team, but with the vast majority of their squad expected to be unchanged from the team that took the field in the quarter-final against South Africa, they will be bringing a very strong team to each occasion. Couple that with having their fixtures against Ireland and England at home in France, and it looks very much like their tournament to lose.

## Lamar Gets a Lombardi
The NFL Playoffs are upon us at last, with 3 rounds of knockout matches to be played before the winners of the American and National Football Conferences go head-to-head in the Big Dance, the Super Bowl. Neither the Baltimore Ravens nor the San Francisco 49ers will play this weekend as both have earned a bye by virtue of having the best record in their respective conferences, and the form doesn’t lie here as both were certainly deserving of the number 1 seed. Knockout football can be unpredictable, but I would be surprised to see either team not make it to the big game, giving us a rematch of Super Bowl XLVII(which is most memorable for Beyoncé’s half-time performance causing a stadium blackout, delaying the game for some time). On that occasion, the Ravens ran out victors, and I am predicting them to do the same this time around on the back of 2019 MVP quarterback Lamar Jackson. Jackson’s stellar form has him favourite to win MVP again, but he will have his sights set on a Lombardi Trophy. The Ravens took down the 49ers 33-19 in their meeting this season, and head coach John Harbaugh has routinely produced hard-nosed, physical football teams capable of winning close games. Contrast this with the 49ers’ head coach Kyle Shanahan, whose teams have often failed when the chips are down, and it is clear to me who will be leaving Las Vegas victorious.

## Lee Carsley to Come Home
When Eileen Gleeson was announced as full-time manager of the Ireland Women’s team, conspicuous in its absence was a similar appointment on the Men’s side of the game. Stephen Kenny’s reign as manager ended last November following a string of poor results, culminating in a 2-1 loss to the Netherlands, leaving the position vacant ahead of Ireland’s fixtures in the Nations League and upcoming qualifying campaign for the 2026 World Cup. A number of names have been linked with the job, including Steve Bruce and Chris Hughton, but the one that makes the most sense for me is Lee Carsley. The former Republic of Ireland international has overseen a successful period for the England U-21s team in which they claimed the 2023 U-21s European Championship. With the Republic squad a talented but inexperienced bunch, Carsley’s knowledge of the system coupled with a proven ability to work with young players could be exactly what is needed to get back to a major tournament.


## Major Year for McIlroy
After a series of near-misses in recent years, I am backing Rory McIlroy to break his 9-year Major drought in 2024. He found some of his best golf as the on-course leader of Europe’s reclamation of the Ryder Cup on home soil, and with the PGA Tour and LIV Tour still locked in negotiations with no end in sight, I expect a fired-up McIlroy to return to the summit of golf. I don’t see it happening at the year’s first Major, The Masters tournament at Augusta National, as his mental block seems greatest at that venue with the pressure he puts on himself to complete the career Grand Slam(winning all 4 Majors at least once). McIlroy’s issues have only ever been mental, as he has the game to take apart any course, and he has spoken at length about trying to relax on the course a bit more. If he can rediscover his self-confidence and swagger, I don’t see any reason he couldn’t snap the streak at Valhalla(PGA Championship), Pinehurst(U.S. Open) or Royal Troon(The Open).

## A 5th Star for the Ster
Reading the coverage of Leinster’s performances this season, you’d swear they were in a scrap for a URC playoff position. Such is the standard they have set over the past few years that 2 losses this season in all competitions is viewed as a poor return, despite two victories over provincial rivals Munster and claiming the scalp of their European arch-nemeses, La Rochelle, away from home. It is true that Leinster’s attack has not been anywhere near the well-oiled machine of recent seasons, but when one factors in the departures of Stuart Lancaster and Johnny Sexton, arguably the 2 biggest influences on Leinster over the past decade, the long-term injury to Ross Byrne, and the mental and physical fatigue experienced by a majority of the frontline squad who suffered heartbreak at the World Cup, Leinster should be commended for how well they have coped. They will continue to improve as new coach Jacques Nienaber’s influence grows with time, and it is only a matter of time before the attack finds its rhythm. With their defence set to improve, and a good chance at a home route to the final, I am predicting Leinster to add a 5th star to their jersey in May at the Tottenham Hotspur Stadium. They will face tough opposition with the renewed form of the English teams, a high-flying Bordeaux squad and of course, the looming threat of Ronan O’Gara’s La Rochelle outfit, but I believe they have the experience and toughness to grind out victories that may have escaped them in recent times.

## Not Quite Carlos’ Time
After Carlos Alcaraz’s phenomenal victory over Novak Djokovic in last year’s Wimbledon final, many were wondering if the torch was finally being passed from the Federer-Nadal-Djokovic era to a new generation. Then Djokovic went and claimed his record 24th Grand Slam at the U.S. Open in Flushing Meadows, and in doing so sent a message to the world: not just yet. The 36-year old Serb has not lost any of his imperious, Terminator-esque aura, and it took the match of Alcaraz’s life to knock him off at the All-England Club. I expect Djokovic to again be the dominant force in men’s tennis in 2024, with Alcaraz claiming one of the 4 majors as he has the past 2 years. If I had one wish, it would be for Rafa Nadal to return from his latest injury setback(just weeks before the Australian Open) and ride off into the sunset with a final victory at Roland Garros, a venue he has dominated like no one else in the sport.

## Pep in Their Step
As much as I would love to predict a different winner for the 2023/24 Premier League(even if it were Liverpool), I have a creeping sense of déjà vu when it comes to the powder blue team from Manchester. Throughout their extraordinary run, they have often looked out of sorts for periods of a season, only to romp home with matches to spare. I don’t believe they will run away with this year’s title as Liverpool and Arsenal are worthy foes, but I think, when the dust settles, Manchester City will be celebrating yet another league trophy. Despite a 4 game winless streak in November/December, they sit just 5 points off the top with a game in hand as they welcome back Kevin de Bruyne and Erling Haaland from injury. With Liverpool losing Mohamed Salah to the African Cup of Nations, their lead at the top may only last a few more weeks. Once the Citizens hit the summit, I fear it may be curtains for the other contenders.

## The Celtics Come Of Age
Prior to the start of the NBA season, I predicted the Boston Celtics would be victorious come the end of the Finals, and nearing the halfway point of the regular season there has been no evidence to suggest anything to the contrary. With 28 wins in 36 games, they have the best record in the league, and have played excellent team basketball at both ends of the court. When they reached the Finals in 2022, they were a talented team but inexperience meant they couldn’t handle the pressure. This year, with the offseason additions of Kristaps Porzingis and Jrue Holliday complementing the All-Star talent of Jayson Tatum and Jaylen Brown, as well as Derrick White’s decision-making, they will be looking to claim the historic franchise’s first ring since 2008.

## Champs on the Élysées
3 years after Italy defeated England at Wembley Stadium, the title of European champions will once again be fought over by the heavyweight footballing nations of the continent. With Ireland failing to qualify, it’s wide open(just kidding), and there are a number of teams who will fancy their chances. England will be looking to emulate the feat of their Women’s team, who were crowned champions of the continent in 2022, while hosts Germany will be looking for a strong showing having failed to progress past the group stage of the most recent World Cup. However, there is one nation who, at least on paper, are a cut above the rest. The French national team boasts a squad most nations could only dream about, laden with superstars of the game. Mbappe, Griezmann, and Camavinga are household names, while their depth is such that were their 2nd-string team allowed to enter as a separate nation, they may well be 2nd-favourites for the trophy. That being said, anything goes in a knockout competition, as this group of players know all too well. A below-par showing at the last Euros saw them crash out to Switzerland in the Round of 16, and while they pushed Argentina all the way for 120 minutes and penalties in the most recent World Cup final, they will surely have lamented only playing the final 50, having sleep-walked through the first 70 minutes of the match. However, with that experience at their backs, France have been a team on a mission throughout the qualifiers, and I believe they’ll channel that into glory this summer.

## A Green, White, and Golden Summer
I’m not sure there has been an Olympics in my lifetime where there has been such optimism around the Irish contingent set to travel. In Paris this year, I am predicting a record performance at the Summer Olympics, surpassing the 6 medals won in London in 2012 and rivalling Melbourne 1956 in terms of ranking in the medal table, when we finished 21st. Our traditional strengths of Rowing and Boxing once again represent excellent medal opportunities based on the recent form of our athletes, while the emergences of Rhasidat Adeleke on the track and Daniel Wiffen in the pool will give us plenty to shout about. Rhys McClenaghan’s gold on the pommel horse at last year’s World Championships represents a real chance at a gymnastics medal, while both the Men’s and Women’s Rugby Sevens squads will have their eyes on a prize. In total, I think we end up with 2 golds, 2 silvers and 3 bronzes, and give the sure-to-be-large Irish crowd reason to sing.

That’s all for the Uppercut this week folks, thanks for reading!

*An epic year in store for France*  
*Will Baltimore be victors in the Big Dance?*  
*Irish Olympians could strike gold*  
*On Leinster’s 5th star, I’m sold*  
*Can McIlroy take his Major chance?*   


