---
layout: post
title:  "The Uppercut - The Most Wonderful Time of the Year"
---
*You can also listen to an audio version of this article on Google Drive! [Click here to listen!](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1vBhPjlt1yyESlrsS7yPiSqzejuvsXGUk/view?usp=drivesdk)*

*You can subscribe to the Uppercut by following @simoonssnaps on Instagram, or emailing @theuppercutblog@gmail.com to receive new post notifications.*

Hello and welcome back to the Uppercut. Unfortunately a busy start to the year has meant I have been unable to write as regularly as I would like, but there’s no better time to return than to review the opening two weekends of the 2024 6 Nations. I’ll take a look at how each team fared in their first games since the World Cup, check in on how my 2024 predictions are progressing, and look back on Sunday’s Super Bowl in Las Vegas. Enjoy!

## All That Glitters is Green
With the first 6 games of the 2024 6 Nations in the books, the standout takeaway so far has been the gulf in quality between Ireland and the rest of the sides. In their dominant victories over France and Italy, Ireland have looked like they are playing a different sport to the other five nations, carrying over the fluency and cohesion witnessed over the last few years while seamlessly integrating some fresh faces into the fold. The freedom with which they attack has been the most notable difference, especially when compared with the drab affairs of this past Saturday’s two games, as they have continued to cut teams apart at will. It is true that Wales, Italy and, to some extent, England, are undergoing something of a rebuild post-World Cup, but Scotland and France(minus Antoine Dupont) are way off the quality they showed last year. It is a true testament to Andy Farrell’s coaching ticket that the players appear as motivated as ever, and have made great strides in shaking off what was a gut-wrenching end to the last World Cup cycle.

At the centre of Ireland’s excellence has been the return of their lineout. Despite what the players may say, it was clear for all to see that it was the biggest factor in their earlier-than-desired exit from that competition, but Paul O’Connell deserves great credit for the perfect 26-from-26 return in that department to this point. It has provided prime attacking platforms for the men in green, and while the nitpickers out there may point to a continuation of some issues with regards to their ruthlessness in the final 3rd of the pitch, they have been more than able to find the whitewash when needed, with their 11 tries from the opening two games 7 more than their nearest competitors. New Italy coach Gonzalo Quesada compared Ireland to All Blacks teams of years past following his side's 36-0 defeat on Sunday, and it’s an assessment I would not massively disagree with. There is an air of inevitability about Ireland at the moment, that while you may hold them out for a while, eventually they will seize on any opportunity afforded to them. With more time together in camp, the other nations will surely improve throughout the tournament, but closing the gap to Ireland in that time seems a tall task.

Of the aforementioned fresh faces coming into the squad, the most nerve-settling aspect of Ireland’s wins has been the performances of Jack Crowley. There was legitimate concern around how Ireland would replace such a talismanic figure following the retirement of Johnny Sexton, but Crowley has ably filled his boots, pulling the strings nicely in attack and displaying a running threat that Sexton in his later years was lacking. There have been hiccups of course, particular with regards to his kicking, but given Saturday was only Crowley’s 9th international cap, the room for growth is plentiful, and the mental toughness to shrug off errors and keep playing his game is mightily impressive for such an inexperienced player. The combination of inexperience and pressure he faced in the first 20 minutes in the cauldron of Marseille, against a French team reeling from their own World Cup heartache, will perhaps be the most difficult period of test rugby he will ever play, and to come through that in the manner he did bodes very well for Ireland’s out-half depth chart for the next 10 years, assuming he stays healthy.

Of course, few out-halves can excel without a platform to play off, and Ireland’s pack has out-muscled and out-worked the French and Italian forwards by some margin. Andrew Porter and the ever-excellent Caelan Doris have been dominant(barring some scrum issues for Porter), but it is the addition of ‘Big Joe’ McCarthy that has taken the pack’s physicality to another level. Paolo Garbisi will be seeing McCarthy in his nightmares after a punishing defensive display on Sunday, and his ability to affect all aspects of play allowed Tadhg Beirne to flourish against France. His emergence has pushed James Ryan to the bench, which can only be a good thing in terms of both competition within the squad and the quality of Ireland’s replacements, a necessity in today’s game. 

France have been a major disappointment so far this tournament despite stealing a win away to Scotland. They look a team scarred by their quarter-final loss to South Africa, and are sorely missing the influence of Antoine Dupont and Romain Ntamack in attack. Coach Fabien Galthie, so recently praised for having turned around French rugby, is suddenly very much on the hot seat, and the changes to his coaching staff appear to have had a detrimental effect on the team. They have been unable to recreate the success of Bordeaux Begles at club level despite fielding many of those same players, but a softer schedule over the remaining weeks may allow them to get back on track.

Scotland for their part have shown their quality in fits and spurts, blowing away a weak Welsh team in the first-half in Cardiff and dominating France for much of Saturday’s game. However, the mental side of the game still haunts them, switching off and almost allowing Wales to snatch a game they had no right to win, and inexplicably refusing to punish France for their kicking strategy in Murrayfield, leading to French winger Bielle-Biarrey winning the game with one moment of genius when they should have been out of reach. They have not received the rub of the green when it comes to refereeing decisions, conceding an almost-unfathomable 14 penalties in a row against Wales, and being denied a match-winning try against France when it looked for all the world like Sam Skinner had grounded the ball, only for the TMO to stick with the on-field decision of no try. While their gripes are justified, the best sides in the world do not leave their fates in the hands of the referee, and Scotland won’t progress to another level until they stop getting in their own way.

Perhaps the biggest unknown in this tournament to date is England. Without impressing really at any point, they have 2 wins from 2(albeit against the 2 weakest sides in the tournament), and with Ireland are the only other side in with a chance of winning a Grand Slam. Their revamped defence under former Springboks coach and Ireland international Felix Jones is still very much a work-in-progress, gifting Italy some soft tries but suffocating the Welsh in the 2nd-half on Saturday. Their attack leaves much to be desired, looking at best blunt and direct, and at worst clunky and disjointed. These issues can be worked out with more time spent together, but the question is whether under Steve Borthwick they actually have the appetite to play running rugby. The injury to Marcus Smith has somewhat forced their hand in turning to game-manager George Ford, and I will be interested to see if there is a difference should Smith return to the fold. A trip to Murrayfield following the fallow week should provide a clearer picture of where England are at one year into Borthwick’s tenure.

Wales and Italy always looked like they would struggle in this year’s competition, with Wales blooding a heap of new players and Italy adjusting to a new coach in Argentinian Gonzalo Quesada. In his short time in charge, Quesada has been unable to rectify some persistent issues in Italy’s game, namely their ability to perform for a full 80 minutes, and to back up a strong performance the following week. Having shown improved pragmatism against England in choosing their moments, Italy were unable to see out a victory, but any optimism from that performance was snuffed out against Ireland where they were unable to improve on the score with which they started the game, that being 0. Out-half Garbisi has flashed but has continued to show no ability to control a match, not helped by a pack which has been out-muscled by the English and Irish. Wales’ young bucks have flattered to deceive somewhat, aided by a Scottish second-half collapse following what was one of the worst halves of rugby I have ever seen a Welsh team play, and some early yellow cards for England at Twickenham. Gatland is right to say they are a work-in-progress, especially given the age-profile of their squad(a squad average age of 25, compared to Ireland’s 28.4), but Welsh rugby is not exactly in rude health at the moment, and they cannot afford to keep losing valiantly.


## Reid It and Weep
The first ever Super Bowl in Las Vegas won’t go down as the greatest game of all time, but that will matter not one bit to Kansas City head coach Andy Reid, whose team peaked when it mattered most after a sub-par regular season by their lofty standards. On Sunday night they became the first team since the 2003-04 New England Patriots to win back-to-back Super Bowls, and only the 9th team to achieve the feat. In 2005, Reid was the head coach of the Philadelphia Eagles team that lost the Super Bowl to the Patriots, officially confirming them as a dynasty. Now, he is at the helm of a dynasty all his own, and will have a chance at history next year as the Chiefs attempt to become the first ever team to pull off a ‘3-peat’.

The San Francisco 49ers started the game the brighter of the two teams, racing out to a 10-0 lead despite an early fumble in Chiefs territory, as Patrick Mahomes and co. appeared stuck in the mud. A field goal on the stroke of halftime left the Chiefs just a touchdown adrift when it could have been more, and many of those familiar with Kansas City’s modus operandi would have had the same feelings of dread and inevitability I felt as the teams headed to the locker room.

Before the second-half was the small matter of the Super Bowl half-time. In keeping with the recent trend of selecting acts who peaked 10 years ago, Usher took the stage at Allegiant Stadium. Bolstered by the likes of Alicia Keyes, Lil Jon and Will.I.Am, Usher delivered an entertaining show, if lacking in the kind of wow factor to really make it memorable. Oh well, back to the football.

The 49ers could have had one hand on the trophy early in the second half, but Mr. Irrelevant Brock Purdy could not capitalise on a shocking Mahomes interception, letting the Chiefs off the hook. Kansas City would not make the same mistake, as a 57-yard field goal was followed up by a muffed punt by the 49ers. Mahomes took full advantage of the short field to give the Chiefs their first lead of the game at 13-10.

The 49ers fought back, and a brave 4th down conversion led to them finding their way back into the end zone through Jauan Jennings, having the game of his life after throwing a touchdown earlier in the game. A missed extra point would prove crucial, as the sides traded field goals before Mahomes took the field with less than 2 minutes to play, his side down by 3. They threatened to end the game right there, driving deep into Niners territory, but settled for 3 points and for the 2nd time in history, the Super Bowl went to overtime.

The 49ers won the toss and elected to receive the ball, a curious choice given changes to the overtime rules meant both teams would have a chance to possess the ball(it used to be first score wins). They could only muster up a field goal, meaning a touchdown would win the game for the Chiefs. There was never any doubt, and Mecole Hardman sauntered into the end zone to secure the franchise’s 4th Super Bowl title.

All-Pro tight end Travis Kelce was the first to mention the 3-peat postgame, announcing his intention to keep playing after celebrating the win with his superstar girlfriend Taylor Swift. In the biggest moments, with the game on the line, Mahomes repeatedly turned to Kelce to keep the Chiefs rolling despite having been quiet for much of the game, upsetting those who wanted to blame a downturn in form on his new relationship. Swift, contrary to the expectations of the MAGA Conspiracy Factory, did not appear on the field at halftime to endorse Joe Biden.

For years, Reid was regarded as a good coach, more renowned for his distinctive moustache and poor clock management than anything else. He is finally getting the plaudits he deserves with a 3rd Super Bowl title in 5 years, and has quietly risen up the all-time rankings to now be the 4th-most successful coach in terms of wins. How much longer he will continue to coach is up in the air, but while he is designing plays for Patrick Mahomes, the Chiefs will remain the scariest team in the league.

With his 3rd title, Mahomes has now firmly entered the conversation for the greatest of all time. He is still a long way off Tom Brady’s 7 rings and numerous other records, but he is closing at a rate of knots and is still only 28. Even in perhaps his worst season as a starter so far, he made the plays when they mattered most, and one would have to imagine the Chiefs will reload in the offseason and come back stronger.

For the 49ers, this is a gut-punch of a loss. Along with Baltimore, they were the best team in the regular season, and despite some patchy performances in the playoffs leading up to Sunday, they were in pole position to win this game. They were the better side for the majority, but the pressure caused errors to creep into their game. For all the praise heaped on Kyle Shanahan for his offensive ingenuity, he has now blown leads in the Super Bowl twice to the Chiefs. When remembering he was the offensive coordinator for the Falcons team that melted against the Patriots from 28-3 up in the third quarter of Super Bowl LI, an uncomfortable trend is beginning to emerge. It was also damning to hear his players say they were unaware of the new overtime rules post-game, as I would have assumed this would have been drilled into them from the moment the playoffs began. I expect San Francisco to be right back in the hunt next year, but whether they will they have learned their lessons when the pressure is on is a different question.

## How ‘Bout Them Predictions?
It hasn’t been a great start for my 2024 predictions. The Chiefs’ win over the Ravens in the AFC Championship game two weeks ago officially put paid to my admittedly lofty aspirations of nailing all my picks, as I had felt that Baltimore would go all the way. I underestimated the Chiefs and Mahomes, a mistake I won’t be making again, as they took down MVP Lamar Jackson and the Ravens in their own stadium.

Also looking shaky is my prediction that France would survive without their talisman, Antonine Dupont, and claim the 2024 6 Nations title. Though still in the hunt, France have easily been the tournament’s biggest disappointments, and it would take an upset of frontrunners Ireland to give them a chance. Here’s hoping I stay wrong on this one.

One of the predictions I felt most strongly about has also started off poorly, that being a continuation of Novak Djokovic’s domination of men’s tennis. He looked, surprisingly, more like his age at this year’s Australian Open, eventually falling to young Italian upstart Jannik Sinner in 4 sets at the semi-final stage, who would go on to claim his first Grand Slam title. Time will tell whether this was an anomaly, or a true signal of a changing of the guard.

Finally, my prediction for Lee Carsley to take over as manager of the Irish football team remains up in the air, even as the team prepares to play some friendlies in the coming months. There were positive noises around Carsley taking the job, but the lack of confirmation was followed by rumours of Carsley turning down the job. However, with no one else officially handed the role, I’m saying there’s still a chance.

That’s all for this edition of the Uppercut, thanks for reading!

*McCarthy and Crowley lead the way*  
*The lineout fixed, hip-hip-hooray*  
*The Chiefs reign supreme*  
*After ending the Niners dream*  
*Will there be another Grand Slam come St. Patrick’s Day?*  
