---
layout: post
title:  "The Uppercut - No 6 Nations, No Problem"
---
*You can also listen to an audio version of this article on Google Drive! [Click here to listen!](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1DSGa9B78S03LCVbejg-5pmuKwpjF_1M9/view?usp=drivesdk)*

*You can subscribe to the Uppercut by following @simoonssnaps on Instagram, or emailing @theuppercutblog@gmail.com to receive new post notifications.*

Hello and welcome back to the Uppercut. With the 6 Nations in the first of two fallow weeks, it felt a good time to offer an update on the state of affairs as the Premier League enters the home stretch, and preview the upcoming Formula 1 season with lights-out in a matter of weeks. Plus, a historic week for Ireland in the pool in Qatar. Enjoy!

## 3-Horse Race
With two-thirds of the 2023-24 Premier League season in the books, it’s time to check in on how the race for the title is shaping up. It is now that the contenders need to push for every point to maintain pressure on their rivals, and for the teams aiming for Europe to make their moves.

What has emerged is an exciting 3-way race for the title between Liverpool, Arsenal and holders Manchester City. Since the New Year, these teams have been near-unstoppable, and in Arsenal’s case, just unstoppable. A 2-0 loss in the FA Cup to Liverpool has been the only blot on their copybook, as they avenged that defeat with a 3-1 victory in the league over their title rivals a few weeks later, and in the meantime have casually racked up two 5-0 wins and a 6-0 win. They have found an attacking spark that was a little lacking earlier in the season, and the form of Declan Rice has allowed them to control games against tricky opposition. They have a nice run-in, with their toughest games nicely spread out, but progressing through the Champions League as I expect them to do will bring its own set of challenges. Based on form alone, Arsenal look the best team in the league right now, however coming undone when in a similar position last year makes them somewhat of an unknown.

On the 26th January, Jürgen Klopp rocked the football and sporting world by announcing he would be leaving his post as Liverpool manager following this, his 9th season at the helm. In his time, Liverpool have won the Premier League title for the first time in their history, as well as reaching 3 Champions League finals, winning one. While the city has been mourning, his team have rallied to his cause, determined to send their coach out on a high. Despite the Arsenal loss, Liverpool have been flying, with a 4-1 demolition of Chelsea at Anfield the standout result. They remain 2 points clear of Arsenal, and a victory in next week’s League Cup final(also against Chelsea) could give them the momentum to see out what would be an emotional title win in Merseyside.

The evil empire lurking in the background of all this is, of course, Manchester City, who are showing signs of putting together the kind of run we have become accustomed to seeing under Pep Guardiola. Without facing the toughest of fixtures, City have kept winning while being able to welcome back injured stars, most notably Kevin de Bruyne, whose influence was never more obvious than when sprung from the bench to turn around a 2-1 deficit against Newcastle. He is the man who makes this team tick, providing defence-unlocking assists and popping up with a crucial goal every now and then. Star striker Erling Haaland has also returned, albeit with less fireworks as he has initially struggled to find his form, evidenced by his inability to take several gilt-edged chances in this weekend’s 1-1 draw at home to Chelsea. However, it would take a brave man to suggest Haaland will not return to his best, and when he does, there will be nowhere for opposing defences to hide. 4 points off the lead with a game in hand, they will feel like it is their title to lose.
*Edit: after writing this, City beat Brentford 1-0 with Haaland scoring the crucial goal, leapfrogging Arsenal and moving them to within 1-point of leaders Liverpool.*

The race for 4th, and a guaranteed spot in the Champions League, also appears to be between 3 teams. Aston Villa are in pole position on 49 points, but their spotty form has seen both Tottenham and Manchester United become real challengers. With less squad depth than their more cash-rich rivals, Villa were always going to struggle to maintain a title run, and their goal now will be to maintain position. The wins aren’t quite coming as easy as they did earlier in the season, and losses to Newcastle and Manchester United suggest they may be slightly out of their depth. Spurs, meanwhile, have performed adequately in the absence of captain Heung-min Son, who was away on international duty with South Korea in the Asian Cup. A 2-1 loss to Wolves this past week in his return to the starting line-up was not the homecoming he would have wanted, but they remain a dangerous team who can push for a Champions League spot if they manage to stay healthy. Based on current form however, the team I say is most likely to claim 4th spot is United. They have been able to pull out some gutsy wins that at times looked unlikely, and in Rasmus Hojlund they seem to have found a genuine goalscorer. After going goalless in his first 14 league starts, Hojlund has now scored in each of his last 6 appearances, including a brace to give United a 2-1 win at relegation-threatened Luton on Sunday. It appears to have given the whole team a lift, and there is a sense that things are finally beginning to fall into place under manager Erik ten Hag. That being said, they must still play each of the top 3, and they still look prone to the odd slip-up against weaker opposition. Time will tell whether United have truly turned a corner, or if they are flattering to deceive.

At the other end of the table, Sheffield United and Burnley look set to return from whence they came after earning promotion from the Championship last year. They are ranked 19th and 20th in the league in terms of goals scored, the same positions that they currently occupy in the table, and there doesn’t appear to be a light at the end of the tunnel. Having come through the Championship play-offs to earn promotion to the Premier League, Luton Town now look the biggest hope of the 3 in terms of staying up. Currently in 17th, Luton are 1 point above the drop-zone, but have been by far the most competitive against the top teams. To avoid relegation, they will have to see off Everton, whose 10 point penalty for financial misdeeds may end up dooming them to the same fate as Burnley and Sheffield United. The fight for survival between Luton and Everton is fascinating not just because of the monetary incentive of playing in the Premier League, but also because of the juxtaposition of the history of these two clubs. Everton are a huge club despite playing second fiddle to Liverpool in Merseyside, and have never been relegated from the Premier League, while Luton have risen up through the leagues to reach the top tier for the very first time. One of tradition or tenacity will prevail when all is said and done.

## No Signs of Ver-stoppin’
The 10 teams comprising this year’s Formula 1 grid have revealed their latest challengers, and that can only mean one thing: the return of racing. With the first race in Bahrain less than 2 weeks away, the cars will take to the track this week for 3 days of pre-season testing, where they will attempt to exorcise any ghosts from their machines and hope their on-paper design theories translate to real life. There has been plenty of activity in the drivers’ market over the past offseason, and at the end of the record-breaking 24-race calendar, each will be hoping to be crowned the World Champion for 2024.

All but the most fervent of Verstappen fans will be hoping that 2023 does not repeat itself. Red Bull, and number 1 driver Max Verstappen, enter the season in pole position coming off the most dominant season in F1 history. With perhaps the greatest car ever assembled underneath him, Verstappen was imperious and easily saw off any challenges from his team-mate, Sergio Perez. The team won an unprecedented 21 of 22 races, Verstappen claiming 19 of those, but perhaps the most ominous thought for their rivals is knowing that due to the absolute dominance of last season’s car, Red Bull were able to devote the majority of their resources to developing this year’s car rather than making incremental upgrades throughout the season. Their car’s unveiling certainly raised eyebrows with a radical redesign, and it will be interesting to see during pre-season testing whether their dominance is as evident as it was at this point last year. It’s not all sunshine and daisies for the Milton Keynes team however, as their outspoken Team Principal Christian Horner faces an internal investigation after reports of ‘inappropriate or controlling behaviour towards a female employee’. Horner vehemently denies the allegations, but any outcome that sees him step down as head of the team would be a shock to the whole grid, having occupied the role since the team’s inaugural season in 2005.

Mercedes and Ferrari enter the season the most likely challengers to Red Bull’s dominance. Ferrari were the nearest team last year, but an array of strategic and mechanical mistakes have plagued the famous Italian car manufacturer for several years. Spaniard Carlos Sainz was the only driver not in a Red Bull to claim a race victory last year, however this will be his final season(for now) in red after the bombshell news of Lewis Hamilton’s impending departure from Mercedes. The Briton is leaving the team with which he won 6 World Titles and *should* have had a 7th, in favour of seeing out the final years of his career with the most recognisable brand in motorsport. He will be desperate to leave on a high, and Mercedes have gone back to the drawing board in an attempt to close the gap to the top, hoping to provide a more stable experience for Hamilton and team-mate George Russell.

Below the top 3 teams, McLaren and Aston Martin will resume their duel for ‘best of the rest’, with both constructors returning their driver pairings from last year. McLaren signed Lando Norris to a long-term contract after showing an incredible improvement over the last season, starting 2023 near the back of the grid only to introduce upgrades which saw them claim 4th place. Aston Martin went the opposite direction, securing a few podium finishes early in the season only to drop back through the field as the season progressed. 2-time World Champion Fernando Alonso and Lance Stroll, son of team owner Lawrence Stroll, will be hoping for a more consistent performance this year.

## Too Pool For School
Ireland enjoyed their best ever showing at the Swimming World Championships in Doha, as 22-year old Down-native Daniel Wiffen continued his meteoric rise up the swimming ranks. Last year, he smashed the 800m short-course(25m pool) record, and last week took his talents to the long-course(50m), competing in the 400m, 800m and 1500m. He would go on to claim gold in the 800m and 1500m events, the latter by a margin of over 10 seconds, and was just 3 seconds adrift of the world record. Some heavy-hitters were missing from the event, but there is no denying that Wiffen, with room to improve, stands a real chance of bringing home some expensive souvenirs from the Paris Olympics later this year.

That’s all for the Uppercut this week, thank you for reading!

*Mercedes, Ferrari and Red Bull*  
*A repeat of last year would be dreadful*  
*3-horse race for the Prem*  
*Can anyone stop* them  
*Hopefully Wiffen won’t leave Paris regretful*
